
==== Front
Brain BehavBrain Behav10.1002/(ISSN)2157-9032BRB3Brain and Behavior2162-3279John Wiley and Sons Inc. Hoboken 3156868610.1002/brb3.1408BRB31408ReviewReviewsThe role of the brain–gut–microbiota axis in psychology: The importance of considering gut microbiota in the development, perpetuation, and treatment of psychological disorders GANCI et al.Ganci Michael https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2815-0548
1
Michael.ganci1@live.vu.edu.au Suleyman Emra 
1
Butt Henry 
2

3
Ball Michelle 
1

1 
Psychology Department
Institute for Health and Sport
Victoria University
Melbourne
Vic.
Australia

2 
Bioscreen Yarraville (Aust) Pty Ltd
Melbourne
Vic.
Australia

3 
Melbourne University
Melbourne
Vic.
Australia
* Correspondence

Michael Ganci, Psychology Department, Institute for Health and Sport, Victoria University, Melbourne, PO Box 14428, Melbourne, Vic. 8001, Australia.

Email: Michael.ganci1@live.vu.edu.au
30 9 2019 11 2019 9 11 10.1002/brb3.v9.11e0140818 7 2019 15 8 2019 © 2019 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Abstract
Introduction
The prevalence of psychological disorders remains stable despite steady increases in pharmacological treatments suggesting the need for auxiliary treatment options. Consideration of the brain–gut–microbiota axis (BGMA) has made inroads into reconceptualizing psychological illness from a more holistic perspective. While our understanding of the precise role of gut microbiota (GM) in psychological illness is in its infancy, it represents an attractive target for novel interventions.

Method
An extensive review of relevant literature was undertaken.

Results
Gut microbiota are proposed to directly and indirectly influence mood, cognition, and behavior which are key components of mental health. This paper outlines how GM may be implicated in psychological disorders from etiology through to treatment and prevention using the Four P model of case formulation.

Conclusion
Moving forward, integration of GM into the conceptualization and treatment of psychological illness will require the discipline of psychology to undergo a significant paradigm shift. While the importance of the GM in psychological well‐being must be respected, it is not proposed to be a panacea, but instead, an additional arm to a multidisciplinary approach to treatment and prevention.

Gut microbiota are proposed to influence mood, cognition, and behavior both directly and indirectly. This offers a new approach to conceptualizing psychological disorders from predisposition through to treatment. While not suggesting that targeting the gut microbiota is the panacea to all psychological conditions, it does offer an exciting new arm to a holistic and multidisciplinary approach to promoting psychological well‐being.


allostatic loadgut microbiotaprecipitating factorspredisposing factorsprotective factorspsychology source-schema-version-number2.0cover-dateNovember 2019details-of-publishers-convertorConverter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:5.7.2 mode:remove_FC converted:05.12.2019


Ganci 
M 
, 
Suleyman 
E 
, 
Butt 
H 
, 
Ball 
M 
. The role of the brain–gut–microbiota axis in psychology: The importance of considering gut microbiota in the development, perpetuation, and treatment of psychological disorders . Brain Behav . 2019 ;9 :e01408
10.1002/brb3.1408 
31568686 



Funding information


This paper did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not‐for‐profit sectors. However, the first author was supported by a postgraduate scholarship with no restrictions on publications cofunded by Bioscreen, an industry partner of Victoria University.
==== Body
1 INTRODUCTION
Burgeoning research regarding the role of the gut and its microbial inhabitants in the pathophysiology of psychological illness is gaining momentum. Early evidence points to gut microbiota (GM) as a possible missing link in the conceptualization and treatment of psychological illness that sees disparities between conventional treatment methods and prevalence rates. When discussing the role of GM in behavior, health, and disease, it is important to pay respect to the intertwined coevolution between humans and our resident microbes. It is suggested that the sharp increase in various disease states over the last 50–100 years (Campell, 2014; Linneberg et al., 2000) can be, at least in part, explained by relatively recent dietary and lifestyle changes in the context of human evolution (Broussard & Devkota, 2016). Currently, humans, particularly those in industrialized countries, are living in an environment to which they have not adaptively evolved (Gluckman, Low, Buklijas, Hanson, & Beedle, 2011). An unintended consequence of industrialization, these changes are putting the GM under evolutionary pressure to shift from a previously mutualistic relationship with their human host to a more antagonistic one (Broussard & Devkota, 2016; Quercia et al., 2014). This is due to human evolution requiring significantly more time (Uyeda, Hansen, Arnold, & Pienaar, 2011) compared to single‐celled organisms such as GM that evolve and adapt to environmental and internal states much more rapidly (within as little as 24 hr; David et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2011). These variations in the evolutionary pressures and capabilities of the two components (host and GM) of a single ecosystem (the holobiont; Theis et al., 2016) result in systemic disharmony.

This systemic disharmony leads to symptomatology and disease states that are the primary target for intervention in current medical models, which precludes effective etiology‐focused prevention (Marvasti & Stafford, 2012). This is exacerbated given that current medical models are heavily skewed toward treatment over prevention (Singh, 2010). While there is disagreement over whether the occurrence of common mental disorders are increasing or whether their prevalence remains consistent (Friedrich, 2017; Harvey et al., 2017), the consumption of antidepressant drugs doubled in most, if not all, Organisation for Economic Co‐operation and Development (OECD) countries between 2000 and 2015 (OECD, 2017). Despite this, depression has recently taken over as the leading cause of disability worldwide with anxiety also in the top 10 leading causes of disability (World Health Organisation (WHO) 2017). Furthermore, subclinical psychological symptoms that do not meet the full Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM) or International Classification of Diseases (ICD) diagnostic criteria are also prevalent (Angst, Merikangas, & Preisig, 1997; Haller, Cramer, Lauche, Gass, & Dobos, 2014; Mathieson, Collings, & Dowell, 2009). These subclinical symptoms lead to impairment in psychosocial and work functioning, are a major determinant of sick leave, contribute to the use of psychotropic drugs and primary health care services, and reduce quality of life (Haller et al., 2014; Johansen & Dittrich, 2013; Mendlowicz & Stein, 2000).

The conceptualization of the human body as being made up of separate and distinguishable systems is likely to have contributed to our current poor appreciation of the complexity of mechanisms that underlie the etiology and progression of disease. Psychology, just like many other healthcare professions and medical science disciplines, specialize and focus on specific body systems. For example, treatment of psychological symptoms and disorders tends to be central nervous system (CNS)‐centric with the brain being the principle target for both psychotherapy and psychopharmacology while peripheral systems, such as the gut, receive little attention. While there is no doubt that specialization has its benefits and has contributed to the progression of medical knowledge, it also has its drawbacks. Operating within these constrictive distinctions imposed by disciplinary specialization means that the complex interplay between various body systems essential to proper functioning is overlooked. The true etiology of disease is likely to come from dysregulations in this interplay which may also go some way to explaining high levels of comorbidity, particularly between functional gastrointestinal disorders such as IBS and psychological conditions (Garakani et al., 2003; Lee et al., 2015).

Within the field of psychology, an integral part of intervention is case formulation. Essentially, case formulation involves the synthesis of information about a patient (typically gained through clinical interviews and formalized cognitive testing) in a meaningful way to facilitate the development of a treatment plan. A commonly used model in structuring a case formulation is that of the Four Ps which represent the predisposing, precipitating, perpetuating, and protective factors related to a client's presenting problem and thus the targets of psychological intervention. As information is drawn from clinical interviews and cognitive testing, the functioning of a client's gut is seldom considered in their formulation; thus, important diagnostic and treatment options may be missed. It is the contention of this paper to demonstrate that GM are intimately linked with each of these four pillars of psychological intervention and thus each stage of disease, from etiology through to treatment and prevention. This paper adds to the burgeoning research into the brain–gut–microbiota axis (BGMA; Kelly, Clarke, Cryan, & Dinan, 2016) demonstrating that the discipline of psychology is on the cusp of a significant paradigm shift, moving away from CNS‐centric approaches toward a more holistic conceptualization of health and disease which integrates other body systems. We echo the sentiment of Allen, Dinan, Clarke, and Cryan (2017) who call for a challenge to the reductionist approaches in psychology in favor of a multidisciplinary approach to conceptualizing and treating psychological disorders. In taking the unique approach of the Four P model of case formulation, this paper intends to review existing research on associations between GM and psychological outcomes, compiling it in a way that is more accessible to psychologists, especially those who have little previous knowledge regarding the BGMA.

1.1 The brain–gut–microbiota axis
The BGMA is increasingly being recognized as playing an important role in homeostasis and consequentially, health and disease states (e.g., Mu, Yang, & Zhu, 2016; Rea, Dinan, & Cryan, 2016). The BGMA refers to the relationship between the brain and the gut while acknowledging the important moderating role of GM (e.g., Carabotti, Scirocco, Maselli, & Severi, 2015; Grenham, Clarke, Cryan, & Dinan, 2011). Largely recognized as a bidirectional relationship (e.g., Rhee, Pothoulakis, & Mayer, 2009), research continues to uncover the true complexities of this communication network which Rea et al. (2016) more accurately define as a multidirectional relationship. It is multidirectional in the sense that each component of this extensive communication network has the ability to moderate and manipulate the function of the other systems involved. Communication between the brain and the gut is maintained via a complex network including the CNS, autonomic nervous system (ANS), enteric nervous system (ENS), hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, neural, endocrine and immune systems (e.g., Carabotti et al., 2015; Cryan & Dinan, 2012; Mayer, 2011; Moloney, Desbonnet, Clarke, Dinan, & Cryan, 2014). Essentially, the BGMA provides a network for signals from the brain to influence the motor, sensory, and secretory functions of the gut while simultaneously allowing signals and metabolites from the GM to influence brain development, biochemistry, function, and behavior (e.g., Cryan & O'Mahony, 2011; Grenham et al., 2011; Marques et al., 2014). This communication system presents an exciting and novel target for psychological intervention, providing a deeper understanding of the biological underpinnings of psychological illnesses. It is hoped that developing a greater understanding of the BGMA as it relates to the Four Ps of case formulation will provide psychologists with an additional tool in the treatment of their clients.

1.2 Is diet the chicken, or the egg?
The relationship between diet and GM is an intriguing one, ironically reminiscent of the idiom regarding which came first, the chicken or the egg. Once thought to be unidirectional (diet influencing the composition of the microbiota), recent evidence suggests the relationship could in fact be bidirectional, with microbes also being able to influence food choice and dietary‐related behaviors (Alcock, Maley, & Aktipis, 2014).

Diet is arguably one of the most important environmental factors in shaping the composition and metabolic activities of GM (De Filippo et al., 2017; Garcia‐Mantrana, Selma‐Royo, Alcantara, & Collado, 2018; Voreades, Kozil, & Weir, 2014). As such, diet must be taken into consideration when discussing potential interventions involving GM. An extensive review of the relationship between diet and GM is beyond the scope of this paper, but can be found elsewhere (e.g., Sheflin, Melby, Carbonero, & Weir, 2017; Singh et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2011). Here, diet is discussed insofar as to highlight to psychologists the importance of this environmental factor in the formulation and treatment of their client's presenting problem. While it is not being suggested that psychologists become well versed in dietetics, gathering general information on a client's diet may provide further insight into the development and perpetuation of their presenting problem, and presents as an additional arm to a multidisciplinary and holistic treatment approach.

Both the content and diversity of an individual's diet are believed to be important in maintaining a well‐balanced GM (Heiman & Greenway, 2016; Oriach, Robertson, Stanton, Cryan, & Dinan, 2016). Diet quality has also been highlighted as a potential risk or protective factor for conditions such as depression (Jacka et al., 2017; Koopman & El Aidy, 2017; Lai et al., 2014). In regards to dietary content, the industrial revolution saw a significant increase in highly processed cereals rich in carbohydrates, refined sugars, sodium, omega‐6, and trans‐fatty acids. Concurrently, potassium, complex carbohydrates, fiber, omega‐3, and unsaturated fatty acids were considerably reduced (Rubio‐Ruiz, Peredo‐Escárcega, Cano‐Martínez, & Guarner‐Lans, 2015). These changes are reflective of what is today termed the “Western‐style diet,” one that has been shown to impair immune function and promote inflammation (Myles, 2014). This is concerning given that inflammation is believed to underlie and perpetuate many, if not all, psychological and neurodegenerative illnesses (Almond, 2013; Miller & Raison, 2016; Rea et al., 2016). Worryingly, dietary diversity has been further reduced over the past 50 years with an ever increasing preference for convenience and taste (Glanz, Basil, Maibach, Goldberg, & Snyder, 1998; Heiman & Greenway, 2016; Poti, Mendez, Ng, & Popkin, 2015). Essentially, this means that current human diets are not providing GM with the resources they require to perform their myriad of complex tasks involved in host homeostasis and consequently health and disease. Adding support to this contention, Jacka et al. (2017) conducted a clinical trial which demonstrated that adherence to a modified Mediterranean diet resulted in significantly greater improvement in depression ratings from baseline compared to a social support control group.

While diet is one way through which a host can modulate their GM, microbes are themselves able to influence eating behaviors of their host (Alcock et al., 2014). Microbes in the gut must cooperate and share limited resources (space and nutrients) to promote stable coexistence and ecological diversity (Allen & Nowak, 2013). This means that these microorganisms are under selective pressure to ensure their own survival and must therefore compete for available resources (Hibbing, Fuqua, Parsek, & Peterson, 2010). As such, microbes are proposed to manipulate the eating behavior of the host by either generating cravings for foods that they thrive on or those which suppress their competitors, or by influencing mood which leads to the intake of foods that enhance that species' fitness (Alcock et al., 2014; Leitao‐Goncalves et al., 2017).

1.2.1 Dietary‐derived short‐chain fatty acids
A continued loss of fiber from the Western diet will inevitably lead to continued depletion of short‐chain fatty acids (SCFAs; Broussard & Devkota, 2016) with downstream effects on the development and perpetuation of psychological illnesses through their immunoregulatory effects (Rogers et al., 2016). SCFAs (acetic, butyric, and propionic acids in particular) are one of the main metabolites of GM (Carabotti et al., 2015; Smith et al., 2013). They are the end products of dietary fiber fermentation and have been shown to have many beneficial effects on host health (Bourassa, Alim, Bultman, & Ratan, 2016; den Besten et al., 2013).

In the brain, SCFAs demonstrate neuroprotective properties (Sun et al., 2015) with butyrate in particular having a protective effect on psychological and neurodegenerative disorders (Bourassa et al., 2016). Peripherally, SCFAs are believed to influence the size and function of regulatory T cells which play a crucial role in regulating inflammation and immune homeostasis (Hakansson & Molin, 2011; Smith et al., 2013). Additionally, SCFAs (together with enzymes also produced by the GM) enhance intestinal barrier functioning through their regulation of tight junction (TJ) proteins (e.g., Anderson et al., 2010; Bischoff et al., 2014; Peng, Li, Green, Holzman, & Lin, 2009). Abnormal intestinal permeability (leaky gut) results in increased translocation of toxins and GM across the epithelial barrier which consequently trigger an inflammatory immune response that can dysregulate ENS and systemic immune functioning (Berkes, Viswanathan, Savkovic, & Hecht, 2003; Carabotti et al., 2015; Fasano, 2012; Smith et al., 2013). This immune response is believed to be the instigator of resultant symptom expression including psychological disorders such as depression (e.g., Maes et al., 2013; Mulak & Bonaz, 2015; Sheedy et al., 2009).

Also via their influence on TJ proteins, SCFAs are believed to regulate the permeability of the blood–brain barrier (BBB; Braniste et al., 2014). Dysregulation of the BBB has been associated with neuropsychological conditions including Alzheimer's disease (Kuhnke et al., 2007) and autism (Fiorentino et al., 2016). Schoknecht and Shalev (2012) suggest that depression and schizophrenia may also be related to BBB dysfunction. Although further research is needed, these associations are highly plausible given the BBB is responsible for regulating access of circulating macromolecules and potential neurotoxins to the brain (Fiorentino et al., 2016; Patel & Frey, 2015). As evidence of microbial involvement, Braniste et al. (2014) found that germ‐free (GF) mice (those devoid of bacterial colonization and therefore lacking conventional gut flora) have increased BBB permeability compared to specific pathogen‐free (SPF) mice that have conventional GM colonization free of any known pathogens. Colonization of GF mice with known SCFA‐producing bacterial strains (Clostridium tyrobutyricum and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron) was found to normalize BBB function (Braniste et al., 2014). There is also evidence to suggest that SCFAs are involved in glucose metabolism, reducing adiposity, appetite regulation, and energy homeostasis (Byrne, Chambers, Morrison, & Frost, 2015; Chambers et al., 2015; Kondo, Kishi, Fushimi, Ugajin, & Kaga, 2009; Morrison & Preston, 2016).

1.3 Behavior
Studies using GF mice have provided the greatest depth of information regarding the influence of GM on host behavior. Such preclinical work gives useful insights into the physiological mechanisms through which the BGMA functions. For example, GF mice demonstrate altered expression of brain‐derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and SCFA while also exhibiting altered HPA axis functioning, anxious and depressive behaviors, and social functioning (Arentsen, Raith, Qian, Forssberg, & Diaz Heijtz, 2015; Luczynski et al., 2016; Neufeld, Kang, Bienenstock, & Foster, 2011; Sudo et al., 2004). In both animal and human models, manipulation of GM has also been demonstrated to alter levels of stress hormones corticotropin‐releasing factor (CRF) and cortisol (Yarandi, Peterson, Treisman, Moran, & Pasricha, 2016). Many of these abnormalities have been shown to be rectified by colonization with the feces from SPF mice or with specific probiotics (e.g., Bercik et al., 2011; Desbonnet et al., 2010; Sudo et al., 2004). However, Bravo et al. (2011) found that ingestion of probiotics was only beneficial in mice which had an intact vagus nerve, demonstrating the importance of the vagal pathway in brain–gut communication. Additionally, Sudo et al. (2004) demonstrated that recolonization was only effective if it occurred within a critical period, providing evidence for a fundamental role of GM in the development of crucial systems involved in behavioral outcomes.

A recently proposed way in which GM may manipulate host behavior is via their relationship with personality traits. Kim et al. (2018) found an increased abundance of Gammaproteobacteria in those with high neuroticism, as well as those with low extraversion. Low conscientiousness was associated with an increased abundance of Proteobacteria and a decreased abundance of Lachnospiraceae while those with high levels of openness demonstrated greater phylogenic diversity and richness (Kim et al., 2018). As this was the first study to have investigated the link between GM and personality directly, further research is required to elucidate these relationships. The relationship between personality and GM presents as an intriguing area of exploration, given that personality traits have a strong association with behavioral patterns in addition to physiological and psychological health outcomes (e.g., Ferguson, 2013; Kim et al., 2018; Srivastava & Das, 2015).

Additional evidence linking GM composition and behavior comes from the study of patients following gastric bypass surgery. Behavioral changes following gastric bypass surgery include patients feeling less hungry and having a preference for healthier foods (Behary & Miras, 2015) which is likely related to changes in neural responses to food (particularly high‐calorie foods) in key areas of the mesolimbic reward pathway (Ochner et al., 2011, 2012). It is tempting to speculate that these changes are associated with the compositional changes in GM following gastric bypass surgery (Furet et al., 2010; Liou et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2009). Additionally, improvements in quality of life and levels of depression have been shown to persist two years after surgery (Karlsson, Sjostrom, & Sullivan, 1998; Mokhber, Shaghayegh, Talebi, & Tavassoli, 2016). These improvements may be the result of reduced adipose tissue which has downstream effects on GM and their role in inflammation and other related functions. While causational evidence is currently unavailable, correlational research linking GM and mood (Jiang et al., 2015) suggest that changes in GM composition following gastric bypass surgery may also have a direct influence on mood. Improvements in mood may consequently encourage healthier food choices and eating behaviors (Christensen & Brooks, 2006), exemplifying the potential for a cyclical relationship involving diet, GM, and mood that is beneficial to overall health.

Given the possible role of GM in eating behaviors, and their ability to influence hunger and satiety (Cani et al., 2009) and neuropeptide and endocrine regulation (Holzer & Farzi, 2014), a relatively new line of inquiry has emerged investigating GM involvement in eating disorders which are traditionally recognized as psychological disorders (Kleiman et al., 2015; Lam, Maguire, Palacios, & Caterson, 2017). Associations between GM composition and eating disorder psychopathology were also found by Kleiman et al. (2015), further suggesting that the GM play a role in the psychology of food choice and eating behaviors. Given that diet is a key determinant of GM composition and that eating disorders are categorized by extreme dietary changes, the GM present as a logical target for inclusion in multifaceted intervention.

While this paper focuses mainly on unconscious mechanisms underlying the relationship between GM and psychological outcomes (such as interoceptive processes and neurotransmitter production), it is acknowledged that conscious mechanisms also have potential psychological implications. For example, gastrointestinal symptoms can be noticeably unpleasant and, particularly in IBS sufferers, can lead to impairment in daily functioning (Ballou, Bedell, & Keefer, 2015), anxiety and depression (Roohafza et al., 2016), avoidance behaviors (Van Oudenhove et al., 2016), and poor quality of life (Canavan, West, & Card, 2015). Conscious mechanisms can also lead to positive psychological outcomes as exemplified by patients following gastric bypass surgery. For example, noticeable changes in body composition can result in more positive body image which in itself is related to psychological well‐being, particularly after body contouring surgery (Jumbe, Hamlet, & Meyrick, 2017; Sarwer & Steffen, 2015; Song et al., 2016). These changes can then encourage long‐term weight loss maintenance behavior (Palmeira et al., 2010).

1.4 Neurotransmitters
Perhaps the most obvious association between GM and psychological illnesses is the ability of GM to manipulate the production and action of several key neurotransmitters (e.g., Anderson & Maes, 2015; Lyte, 2011; O'Mahony, Clarke, Borre, Dinan, & Cryan, 2015). GM regulate the metabolism and concentration of amino acids which serve as precursors for several neurotransmitters including gamma‐aminobutyric acid (GABA), serotonin, melatonin, and dopamine, among others (Clarke et al., 2014; Evrensel & Ceylan, 2015; Jenkins, Nguyen, Polglaze, & Bertrand, 2016; Zagajewski et al., 2012). As such, it is highly plausible that GM are able to influence brain chemistry, which consequentially regulates cognition, mood, and behavior. As depicted in Figure 1, demonstrating bidirectionality, GM can also be directly affected by neurochemicals which alter bacterial growth and pathogenicity (Lyte, 2011). Table 1 displays some of the key neurotransmitters synthesized by GM whose dysregulation is associated with psychological disorders. While neurotransmitters produced in the gut may not directly influence brain chemistry as they do not pass through the BBB, they are able to influence the CNS through mechanisms including direct stimulation of the vagus nerve, as well as using indirect circulatory and immune pathways (Sampson & Mazmanian, 2015). For example, tryptophan, the precursor molecule to serotonin (which is itself the precursor to melatonin), is able to pass through the BBB and as such it is likely that metabolites of GM directly influence brain chemistry (Sampson & Mazmanian, 2015).

Figure 1 Factors influencing the multidirectional communication between the brain and the gut. Double‐headed arrows demonstrate a bidirectional relationship, with broken arrows demonstrating proposed but not yet established relationships. The figure demonstrates the three main well‐established pathways of communication between the brain and the gut, being endocrinological, neuronal, and immunological. The figure also illustrates the bidirectional relationships between microbial dysbiosis and the HPA axis, neurotransmitter production, the function of the blood–brain barrier, and inflammation which are believed to alter their functioning as an allostatic response to homeostatic emotions. It is proposed that microbial dysbiosis itself is able to be detected via the interoceptive system which then triggers these homeostatic emotions

Table 1 Gut bacteria associated with the synthesis of key neurotransmitters

Genus/species	Neurotransmitter (precursor)	CNS effect	Peripheral effect	Psychiatric conditions related to dysregulation	References	

Candida; Streptococcus; Escherichia; Enterococcus; Lactobacillus bulgaricus
	Serotonin (tryptophan)	Motor control, cerebellar regulation, synaptogenesis, addiction, emotion, memory, stress	Circadian rhythm, gut motility, body temperature, visceral pain, appetite, modulation of immune response	Depression, IBS, autism, Down's syndrome	Arreola et al., (2015), Gulesserian, Engidawork, Cairns, and Lubec (2000), Halford and Blundell, (2000), Hood et al. (2006), Jenkins et al. (2016), Leonard, (2010), Mazzoli and Pessione (2016), Marks et al. (2009), Meneses and Liy‐Salmeron (2012), Müller and Homberg (2015), Rogers et al. (2016), Stasi, Rosselli, Zignego, Laffi, and Milani (2014), Warren and Singh, (1996), Whitaker‐Azmitia (2001)	

Corynebacterium glutamicum; Lactobacillus plantarum; Lactobacillus paracasei; Lactobacillus lactis; Brevibacterium lactofermentum; Brevibacterium flavum
	
l‐glutamate	Excitatory, brain development, synaptic plasticity	 	Generalized anxiety disorder, depression, bipolar, schizophrenia, neurodegeneration	Abdou et al. (2006), Boonstra et al. (2015), Cherlyn et al. (2010), Femenía, Gómez‐Galán, Lindskog, and Magara (2012), Hyland and Cryan (2010), Meldrum (2000), Yoto et al. (2012)	

Lactobacillus; Bifidobacterium; Escherichia coli; Pseudomonas
	GABA (l‐glutamate)	Inhibitory, anxiolytic	Myorelaxant, moderates intestinal motility, gastric emptying, gastric acid secretion, and inhibits GI carcinogens and tumor growth	 	 	

Bacillus, Serratia, E. coli
	Dopamine (l‐Dopa)	Reward‐motivated behavior, motor behavior, cognition, emotion	Stimulates exocrine secretion, inhibits gut motility, and modulates sodium absorption and mucosal blood flow	Schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease, depression, anxiety, addiction	Di Chiara and Bassareo (2007), Eisenhofer et al. (1997), Freestone (2013), Grace (2016), Lyte (2011), Meyer and Feldon (2009), Scheperjans et al. (2015), Shishov, Kirovskaya, Kudrin, and Oleskin (2009)
	

Bacillus; E. coli; Saccharomyces
	Norepinephrine (dopamine)	Stress hormone, attentiveness, emotion, sleep, learning	Mediates growth and virulence of potentially pathogenic bacteria	Depression, schizophrenia	Freestone (2013), Moret and Briley (2011), Yamamoto and Hornykiewicz (2004)	
(dependent on tryptophan production and serotonin synthesis)	Melatonin (serotonin)	Circadian rhythm, mood	Gastrointestinal function, protects against gut permeability, anti‐inflammatory, antioxidant, analgesic	IBS, multiple sclerosis, autism, Alzheimer's, mood disorders	Fornaro, Prestia, Colicchio, and Perugi (2010), Ghorbani, Salari, Shaygannejad, and Norouzi (2013), Ortiz, Benítez‐King, Rosales‐Corral, Pacheco‐Moisés, and Velázquez‐Brizuela (2008), Veatch, Goldman, Adkins, and Malow (2015), Wong, Yang, Song, Wong, and Ho (2015)	
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd1.5 Interoception and allostatic responses
It is currently unknown whether the interoceptive system is able to detect microbial dysbiosis (imbalances resulting from the under‐ or overabundance of certain microbial species; DeGruttola, Low, Mizoguchi, & Mizoguchi, 2016), but considering that gut microbes are an essential part of human physiology which moderate several homeostatic emotions (Craig, 2002; Mayer, Naliboff, & Craig, 2006; Noakes, 2012; Paulus & Stein, 2010) it is a strong possibility. Homeostatic emotions are background emotions that may or may not enter conscious awareness but influence an individual's energy levels, mood, and disposition (Mayer et al., 2006). Signals from internal organs, particularly the gut, continuously communicate with various regions of the brain including the limbic system, autonomic and neuroendocrine centers in the hypothalamus, brainstem, and cortex (Craig, 2002; Holzer & Farzi, 2014; Mayer & Tillisch, 2011). It is plausible that through the process of interoception, GM are able to influence human cognition, emotion, and mood through their involvement in systemic functioning through their various metabolites (Holzer, 2017; Paulus & Stein, 2010). As such, increasing rates of disease might be explained by the allostatic load hypothesis (McEwen, 1998). The allostatic load hypothesis proposes that rather than having a stable set point, body systems have a range of set points allowing them to actively adapt to environmental and internal states. Allostatic load is a term used to refer to the cumulative cost of allostasis to the body (“wear and tear”; McEwen & Wingfield, 2003). While adaptive in the short term, allostasis can become maladaptive, leading to disease, when allostatic measures are required to vary widely and frequently, or are at extreme values for long periods of time (James, 2013). Additionally, allostatic systems can become dysfunctional when they lose their ability to change or regulate change (James, 2013). The result of either of these scenarios is allostatic overload which can lead to symptom expression, as depicted in Figure 1 (Berger, Juster, & Sarnyai, 2015; McEwen, 2005; McEwen & Wingfield, 2003). The fact that research has failed to define the precise composition of a healthy GM due to immense interindividual differences (Lloyd‐Price, Abu‐Ali, & Huttenhower, 2016) suggests that the GM may in fact be the most allostatic system within the body. Microbial dysbiosis then could be considered an extreme and prolonged shift away from what would be considered a relatively healthy composition which loses its ability to regulate change in various other host systems and functions. It is perhaps this dysregulation that manifests itself in psychological illness.

Figure 1 depicts the three overarching pathways (endocrinological, neuronal, and immunological) of bidirectional communication between the brain and the gut, each of which is altered during a state of microbial dysbiosis. Although it remains unconfirmed, it is proposed that microbial dysbiosis can be detected via interoception which ultimately leads to altered functioning of factors (e.g., inflammation) that mediate these pathways. These alterations are believed to be an allostatic response to a deviation from a “typical” microbiome, which over time, leads to symptom expression as a result of allostatic overload. The bidirectional relationship between microbial dysbiosis and the factors which alter the three main communication pathways between the gut and the brain illustrate the multidirectional nature of the BGMA.

2 GM THROUGH THE LENS OF A CASE FORMULATION FRAMEWORK
It is not the intention of this paper to propose that the BGMA must be at the forefront of consideration for each and every client. Instead, it is proposed that the relevance of the BGMA is determined on a case‐by‐case basis. The role of the BGMA in a client's presenting problem may be less relevant when there are clear social and emotional etiological factors, such as the presence of significant stressors for a client presenting with anxiety or depression. However, it is worth noting that stress can alter the composition of a person's GM (Bailey et al., 2011), which may or may not be clinically relevant, but should be considered if comorbidities are present. It may also be less relevant for clients who respond well to traditional psychological treatments such as cognitive behavioral therapy. Alternatively, cases in which the role or the BGMA may be more pertinent are when social and emotional etiological factors are less clear or absent, and also for clients who do not respond well to conventional psychological approaches. In cases where a treating clinician considers investigation of the GM to be appropriate, clients should be referred for stool sampling and analysis and an open dialogue established between the clinician and the microbiologist performing the analysis. The following information serves to highlight possible associations between GM and each of the Four Ps.

2.1 Predisposing
As part of their first line of questioning, mental health professionals attempt to explore a client's family history of psychological illness to establish whether that individual has an underlying genetic predisposition (vulnerability) to developing a psychological condition(s). Genetic predisposition to a multitude of psychological conditions has been well established (Hyman, 2000). While research into the role of GM in genetic predisposition is scarce, several lines of evidence suggest that GM may play an integral part in a person's vulnerability to the development of psychological illnesses. Firstly, host genetics have been demonstrated to influence the composition and metabolic activities of GM (Goodrich et al., 2014; Ussar, Fujisaka, & Kahn, 2016) which have important consequences on host physiology, brain development, and health (e.g., Krishnan, Alden, & Lee, 2015; Sekirov, Russell, Antunes, & Finlay, 2010). However, the specific mechanisms behind this relationship remain unclear (Dąbrowska & Witkiewicz, 2016).

2.1.1 Vertical transmission
Additionally, there is evidence to suggest that much like genetics are passed down from parents to offspring, GM are vertically transmitted from mother to infant (e.g., Asnicar et al., 2017; Mueller, Bakacs, Combellick, Grigoryan, & Dominguez‐Bello, 2015). The transmission of microbiota from mother to infant during birth represents the most important point of microbial colonization in the infant gut, which continues over the first three years of life (Yatsunenko et al., 2012). This critical establishment period of GM is in line with the critical development period of the human host (Rea et al., 2016). It is during this time that GM play key roles in the development of the CNS, HPA axis, and immune system (Borre et al., 2014; Cox et al., 2014; Furusawa et al., 2013; Houghteling & Walker, 2015). As such, aberrations in typical colonization of GM during this critical period may also result in abnormal development of these key systems (Tamburini, Shen, Wu, & Clemente, 2016). Factors resulting in aberrations to conventional microbial colonization of the gut during this period, such as birth by cesarean section and antibiotic treatment during infancy, have been associated with increased rates of chronic and atopic diseases (Kolokotroni et al., 2012; Sevelsted, Stokholm, Bonnelykke, & Bisgaard, 2015; Vangay, Ward, Gerber, & Knights, 2015). A recent study by Polidano, Zhu, and Bornstein (2017) highlights the microbiota as a potentially important factor in the negative relationship they found between cesarean birth and a range of cognitive outcomes compared to those born vaginally.

There is a growing consensus that maternal GM may have long‐term health consequences for the child (Stanislawski et al., 2017). It is therefore reasonable to suggest that vertically transmitted GM may act as a mechanism for intergenerational predisposition to psychological disorders. Further research is required as it is difficult to determine whether these intergenerational patterns are due to the vertical transmission of GM or whether they are due to learned behaviors and lifestyle factors shared among family members. This is evidenced by same‐household members showing a higher similarity of GM composition to those outside of the household (Abeles et al., 2016; Song et al., 2013; Yatsunenko et al., 2012).

2.1.2 Aging
Aging, in and of itself, can also predispose an individual to several psychological illnesses. For example, neurodegenerative illnesses, such as Alzheimer's disease, are considered an evolutionary accident occurring as a result of increased longevity (Giunta et al., 2008; Gluckman et al., 2011; Niccoli & Partridge, 2012). There is evidence to suggest that psychological disorders are also more prevalent in the elderly (e.g., Andreas et al., 2017). A contributing factor toward the increased prevalence of disease in the elderly is that the normal aging process is associated with compositional changes and reduced diversity of GM (Biagi et al., 2010). In parallel, normal aging is characterized by chronic low‐grade inflammation, a phenomenon commonly referred to as “inflammaging” (Franceschi et al., 2007). It is believed that this inflammation is, at least in part, attributable to alterations in GM (Buford, 2017). Additionally, aging is associated with changes in the serotonergic system which is also believed to contribute to increased prevalence of psychological disorders in the elderly (O'Mahony et al., 2015). The serotonergic system is regulated by GM (Table 1), therefore making it vulnerable to compositional and metabolic changes (O'Mahony et al., 2015; Rogers et al., 2016).

Given the sheer complexity of the systemic functioning of the human body, there are likely to be several other processes through which GM may be involved in predisposing individuals to the development of psychological illnesses. Further research into how GM influence predisposition to psychological illness will be useful in informing preventative strategies to circumvent the growing burden of such conditions. However, GM not only play a role in predisposing an individual to certain psychological illnesses as highlighted above, but also in the onset and maintenance of those negative health outcomes.

2.2 Precipitating and perpetuating
While psychologists tend to focus heavily on social and environmental factors involved in the onset and maintenance of psychological disorders, biological factors, such as GM composition, also contribute to these stages of disease. The maintenance of a diverse microbial ecosystem in the gut is essential for optimal host function (Moloney et al., 2014; Sekirov et al., 2010). On the other hand, reduced diversity and microbial dysbiosis have been implicated in various psychological, neurological, metabolic, functional gastrointestinal disorders, and autoimmune disease states (Blumstein, Levy, Mayer, & Harte, 2014). These include, but are not limited to, IBS (Jeffery et al., 2012; Tana et al., 2010), autism (Finegold et al., 2002), schizophrenia (Castro‐Nallar et al., 2015), myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS; Fremont, Coomans, Massart, & Meirleir, 2013; Wallis, Butt, Ball, Lewis, & Bruck, 2016), multiple sclerosis (Jangi et al., 2016), dementia (Alkasir, Li, Li, Jin, & Zhu, 2017), stress (Knowles, Nelson, & Palombo, 2008), anxiety (Burch, 2016), depression (e.g., Jiang et al., 2015), obesity (Ley, Turnbaugh, Klein, & Gordon, 2006), diabetes (Larsen et al., 2010), coronary artery disease (Cui, Zhao, Hu, Zhang, & Hua, 2017; Emoto et al., 2017), and cancer (particularly colorectal cancer; Gagniere et al., 2016; Garrett, 2015). Current findings linking GM and disorders are, at this stage, associative and causative links are yet to be established. Additionally, it is unknown whether alterations in GM composition are the cause or consequence of disease. Given available evidence however, it is likely that this is a bidirectional, and cyclical, relationship as depicted in Figure 1.

2.2.1 Stress
Stress has long been recognized as both a precipitating and perpetuating factor to various psychological conditions (Anisman & Zacharko, 1982; Corcoran et al., 2003). Given the crucial role of GM in the development and functioning of the HPA axis (Sudo, 2012), as well as their modulation of stress hormones CRF and cortisol (Carabotti et al., 2015), the involvement of GM in the stress response is increasingly evident. This is further demonstrated by the ability to transfer stress‐prone phenotypes from one mouse to another via fecal transplantation (Collins, Kassam, & Bercik, 2013). Stress also activates an inflammatory response via the promotion of inflammatory cytokines (Liu, Wang, & Jiang, 2017). Given that inflammation is recognized as underlying many psychological and neurodegenerative disorders (Almond, 2013; Miller & Raison, 2016; Rea et al., 2016), stress then appears to play a role in both the etiology and maintenance of psychological illness via biological pathways, all of which are regulated by the GM. While this is reflective of a bottom‐up process whereby GM influence stress, substantial evidence also suggests the occurrence of a top‐down process through which stress regulates GM composition (Bailey et al., 2011; Gur, Worly, & Bailey, 2015; Knowles et al., 2008). The fact that both top‐down and bottom‐up processes have been well established demonstrates the complex cyclical and multidirectional relationship between GM, stress, and psychopathology.

2.2.2 Socioeconomic status
There is an established association between low SES and several factors negatively affecting health, one of which is poor diet (Darmon & Drewnowski, 2008; Shahar, Shai, Vardi, Shahar, & Fraser, 2005). Given that diet is the strongest environmental contributor to a properly functioning GM (e.g., De Filippo et al., 2017; Garcia‐Mantrana et al., 2018), it is possible that the composition and/or metabolic activities of the GM is one of the mediating factors of the relationship between low SES and mental health outcomes. Another factor associated with low SES is lower educational achievement (Sirin, 2005) which may also be mediated by diet‐related changes in GM. Individuals who eat a poor‐quality diet (Western diet) have poorer performance on cognitive tasks (Khan et al., 2015) and poorer mental health (Jacka, Kremer, et al., 2011; Jacka, Mykletun, Berk, Bjelland, & Tell, 2011; Markus et al., 1998) compared to those who eat high‐quality diets. In addition, an association has been found between the consumption of a Western diet and decreased left hippocampal volume (Jacka, Cherbuin, Anstey, Sachdev, & Butterworth, 2015) with hippocampal volume being related to cognition (Choi et al., 2016) and mood (Frodl et al., 2006). It is likely the GM mediate this relationship through their production of SCFAs and BDNF which have been found to be involved in neurogenesis and neuronal protection in mouse models (Canani, Di Costanzo, & Leone, 2012; Lee, Duan, & Mattson, 2002; Sun et al., 2015). Ultimately, poorer performance on cognitive tasks and poorer mental health limit a person's educational attainment (Eisenberg, Golberstein, & Hunt Justin, 2009; Fletcher, 2010; McLeod & Fettes, 2007).

2.3 Protective
Considering the protective abilities of GM or indeed, specific microorganisms, has the potential to revolutionize the treatment of psychological conditions (Kali, 2016; Mazzoli & Pessione, 2016; Sampson & Mazmanian, 2015). The addition of GM modulation to an individual's treatment plan may be the missing link in explaining and counteracting the alarming increase in the disease burden of common mental disorders.

2.3.1 Lifestyle factors
Healthy eating and exercise have long been promoted as being protective factors against both physiological and psychological conditions. Evidence suggests that one of the physiological mechanisms through which healthy eating and exercise affect health is the influence these factors have on the composition and metabolic activity of GM (Mika et al., 2015; Welly et al., 2016). Essentially, a high‐quality diet and exercise provide the GM with the resources they require to maintain optimal host function. While the influence of diet on GM composition is widely researched, that of exercise on GM receives less attention. However, exercise has been shown to enrich microbial diversity, improve the Bacteroidetes‐to‐Firmicutes ratio, and support the growth of SCFA‐producing bacteria which have immunomodulatory effects (Monda et al., 2017). This suggests that like diet, the beneficial outcomes of exercise may be mediated by GM which have downstream effects on mental health.

2.3.2 Pre‐ and probiotics
Both pre‐ and probiotics have also been demonstrated to have psychotropic like effects in healthy volunteers as well as those suffering from conditions such as depression and chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS; Akkasheh et al., 2016; Messaoudi et al., 2011; Rao et al., 2009). Probiotics showing positive effects on mental health are referred to as psychobiotics (Dinan, Stanton, & Cryan, 2013). Studies have demonstrated that various probiotic formulations (mostly including Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium species) have the ability to improve mood in healthy (no reported diagnoses of allergic, neurological, or psychological conditions) men and women (Benton, Williams, & Brown, 2007; Messaoudi et al., 2011; Steenbergen, Sellaro, Hemert, Bosch, & Colzato, 2015). In a placebo‐controlled study, Yamamura et al. (2009) found a probiotic formulation to improve sleep efficacy and number of awakenings (as measured by actigraphy) in an elderly (60‐ to 81‐year‐old) sample. Moreover, a study using fMRI revealed altered activity in brain regions responsible for emotion and sensation processing in women following four weeks of probiotic formulation intake compared to women who received a placebo (Tillisch et al., 2013). Also in a placebo‐controlled study, participants who took a prebiotic (Bimuno‐galactooligosaccharides) daily for three weeks showed significantly lower salivary cortisol levels and decreased attentional vigilance to negative versus positive information (Schmidt et al., 2015). These findings were similar to those of a study that involved the administration of an SSRI (Murphy, Yiend, Lester, Cowen, & Harmer, 2009).

2.3.3 Fecal microbial transplant
The increasing popularity of fecal microbial transplant (FMT) in treating various conditions including but not limited to GI disorders (Brandt & Aroniadis, 2013), Parkinson's disease (Ananthaswamy, 2011), autism (Aroniadis & Brandt, 2013), and ME/CFS (Borody, Nowak, & Finlayson, 2012) is perhaps due to the proliferation of research associating microbial dysbiosis to a range of disorders. In humans, the efficacy of FMT has been shown for conditions such as ulcerative colitis (Shi et al., 2016), but has not yet been demonstrated in treating psychological conditions. It does however offer a promising avenue given strong evidence suggesting a role of GM in the pathogenesis of psychological conditions (Evrensel & Ceylan, 2016). Animal models suggest that FMT is an effective way to ameliorate abnormal physiology and function (e.g., Sudo et al., 2004); however, clinical trials are required to demonstrate whether this approach is equally effective in humans. Additionally, further research is required into the possible risks associated with FMT. While FMT has promising therapeutic potential, Alang and Kelly (2015) present a case study of a patient who developed obesity following FMT treatment from an overweight, but otherwise healthy donor. As GM are associated with numerous physiological and psychological conditions, FMT could theoretically result in the transference of any such condition from donor to recipient (Bunnik, Aarts, & Chen, 2017). As such, it is clear that great care must be taken when screening and selecting potential donors. There is still much to learn about the associations between GM and both physiological and psychological conditions, and therefore, potential long‐term risks of FMT may yet to emerge.

3 CRITICISMS OF CONVENTIONAL TREATMENT WITH RESPECT TO GM
Conventional treatment of psychological disorders typically involves pharmacological intervention such as psychotropics and/or other medications to alter brain chemistry (e.g., Bystritsky, Khalsa, Cameron, & Schiffman, 2013; Lieberman et al., 2005). Although beneficial, such treatments may induce undesirable side effects including, but not limited to, nausea, sleep disturbance, weight gain, and sexual dysfunction (Ferguson, 2001) all of which may themselves be a result of microbe‐mediated drug metabolism (Enright, Joyce, Gahan, & Griffin, 2017). Despite the ever increasing reliance on pharmacotherapy (Kallivayalil, 2008; Vozeh, 2003), disease states remain relatively stable which suggests the need for auxiliary treatment options and/or targets which take into account several body systems, including the GM. Many psychotropic drugs, known for their influence on CNS receptor function, also demonstrate antimicrobial effects (Kalayci, Demirci, & Sahin, 2014) which may have unintended consequences on the BGMA. This is particularly true of many SSRIs commonly used to treat depression and anxiety disorders.

In addition to having direct antimicrobial effects, Ayaz et al. (2015) found that sertraline (an SSRI) augments the effectiveness of several antibiotics by increasing their inhibitory zone. As such, chronic use of these drugs can induce potentially deleterious alterations in GM (Macedo et al., 2017). This may partially explain treatment resistance, although further research is needed to support this notion. Likewise, psychological interventions (e.g., cognitive behavior therapy) also target the brain via a focus on cognitions to affect behavioral change. This top‐down process has demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of functional gastrointestinal disorders such as IBS (Boersma et al., 2016; Palsson & Whitehead, 2013); however, research is needed to determine whether purely psychological interventions can enact changes in GM. By continuing to treat various disorders and symptoms through pharmacological intervention without considering the etiology of initial chemical imbalances, it is unlikely that rates of morbidity will decline. The net effect of ignoring etiology at the expense of treatment is therefore an increased burden upon individuals who are affected by disease, and wider society.

4 REDEFINING WHO WE ARE
There is currently a shift away from thinking of host–microbe interactions in such binary terms toward appreciating the complexity of the relationship between the two. Binary distinctions between host and microbiota remain useful only in so far as to aid our understanding of the role of GM in psychological well‐being, which is still in its infancy. However, emerging nomenclature such as “holobiont” acknowledges that GM are not a separate entity but are instead an integral and inseparable part of human biology (Schnorr, Sankaranarayanan, Lewis, & Warinner, 2016; Theis et al., 2016). This concept is supported by the coevolution of humans and their microbes. The concept that the ratio of bacterial cells to human cells is approximately 1:1 (recently revised down from previous estimations of 10:1; Sender, Fuchs, & Milo, 2016) pays homage to the importance of respecting GM in the conceptualization of human health and well‐being. This reconceptualization of what makes us human also provides a biological and tangible basis for explaining and treating psychological illnesses that can often be considered abstract.

5 CHALLENGES AND THE WAY FORWARD
Understanding the multidirectional relationship between GM and the nervous system is hindered by its inherent complexity (Mazzoli & Pessione, 2016). However, while still in its infancy, interdisciplinary research has uncovered novel ways of conceptualizing disease. While theoretically relevant, research into the BGMA also has important practical implications, offering a more holistic approach to treatment and prevention of psychological illness. While this new field of research is promising, it remains unclear which factors, and in which combination, alter the balance between symptomatic and asymptomatic outcomes.

The sheer number of confounding variables makes it difficult to establish causational links between GM and symptomatology. However, as understanding of the GM advances, so too will research methodology and technology. It is only with continued research into the link between GM and psychological illness that we will be able to elucidate the true extent to which our resident microbes contribute to mental health. As the majority of studies regarding the role of GM in both physiological and psychological health and disease have been conducted using animal models, clinical trials with human samples are imperative to the advancement of knowledge and ultimately practical application.

As the burgeoning research into the relationship between GM and psychological health outcomes gathers momentum, so too does the call to action for psychologists to embrace the microbiome as a potential factor in explaining, treating, and preventing mental illness. This is an important paradigm shift which must occur within the discipline of psychology in order to keep up to date with the most current and complete knowledge of the human body and mind which translates into providing the best possible care for clients. While it is unnecessary and impractical to expect psychologists to develop a detailed understanding of the influence of GM on mental health, it is important that the role of the GM is acknowledged, especially in the absence of clear social and emotional factors. Facilitating this paradigm shift may require change at a “grass roots” level, where psychobiology is better integrated into higher education psychology degrees. Additionally, professional development courses regarding the role of the GM in mental health should be established and promoted to current practicing psychologists who can use this information to provide more complete care for their clients.

The fact that GM are able to influence psychological functioning is an exciting and encouraging prospect, which begs for multidisciplinary approaches to both research and practice. In terms of practical implications, increasing our understanding of the mechanisms that mediate communication processes between GM and host has the potential to inform strategies to limit the damaging aspects of this communication. This will provide new avenues of treatment for a wide range of symptoms and disorders (Freestone, 2013) as well as to promote good health. This will require a substantial shift away from the reductionist approaches that see us working exclusively in our specific field. This is not to suggest that psychologists should become expert in areas outside of their field, but instead to understand and acknowledge that the best way forward is a multidisciplinary approach to the treatment and prevention of mental illness. A shift toward a multidisciplinary, and therefore more holistic, approach will provide an opportunity to better understand the etiology of disease which requires the expertise of several disciplines and a consideration of key body systems, including the GM, as intertwined and inseparable. In light of the evidence research has provided thus far, psychologists working as part of multidisciplinary teams with other professionals such as nutritionists, gastroenterologists, and microbiologists must seriously consider the inclusion of dietary plans, pre‐ and probiotics, and potentially even FMT in the treatment plans of their clients, in conjunction with conventional psychological treatments.

It is not the contention of this paper to claim that ameliorating gut health is the panacea to all psychological disorders and symptomatology. Instead, it is to demonstrate the complex interconnectivity between multiple body systems in disease processes, from etiology through to treatment, and ideally prevention. In support of the call to action by Allen et al. (2017), the discipline of psychology must shift away from its CNS‐centric conceptualization of disease and symptom‐centered disease treatment models toward a multidisciplinary approach to treatment and prevention. This paradigm shift will empower psychologists to better treat and care for their clients. A multidisciplinary approach where healthcare professionals across a variety of disciplines have a united approach to treatment and prevention will also empower the public to better understand and take control of their physiological and psychological health. It is only through this shared awareness that the healthcare community can make inroads into improving the mental health of current and future generations.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
None declared.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.
==== Refs
REFERENCES


Abdou , A. M. 
, 
Higashiguchi , S. 
, 
Horie , K. 
, 
Kim , M. 
, 
Hatta , H. 
, & 
Yokogoshi , H. 
 (2006 ). Relaxation and immunity enhancement effects of gamma‐aminobutyric acid (GABA) administration in humans . BioFactors , 26 (3 ), 201 –208 .16971751 


Abeles , S. R. 
, 
Jones , M. B. 
, 
Santiago‐Rodriguez , T. M. 
, 
Ly , M. 
, 
Klitgord , N. 
, 
Yooseph , S. 
, … 
Pride , D. T. 
 (2016 ). Microbial diversity in individuals and their household contacts following typical antibiotic courses . Microbiome , 4 (1 ), 39 
10.1186/s40168-016-0187-9 
27473422 


Akkasheh , G. 
, 
Kashani‐Poor , Z. 
, 
Tajabadi‐Ebrahimi , M. 
, 
Jafari , P. 
, 
Akbari , H. 
, 
Taghizadeh , M. 
, … 
Esmaillzadeh , A. 
 (2016 ). Clinical and metabolic response to probiotic administration in patients with major depressive disorder: A randomized, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled trial . Nutrition , 32 (3 ), 315 –320 . 10.1016/j.nut.2015.09.003 
26706022 


Alang , N. 
, & 
Kelly , C. R. 
 (2015 ). Weight gain after fecal microbiota transplantation . Open Forum Infectious Diseases , 2 (1 ), ofv004
10.1093/ofid/ofv004 
26034755 


Alcock , J. 
, 
Maley , C. C. 
, & 
Aktipis , C. A. 
 (2014 ). Is eating behavior manipulated by the gastrointestinal microbiota? Evolutionary pressures and potential mechanisms . BioEssays , 36 (10 ), 940 –949 . 10.1002/bies.201400071 
25103109 


Alkasir , R. 
, 
Li , J. 
, 
Li , X. 
, 
Jin , M. 
, & 
Zhu , B. 
 (2017 ). Human gut microbiota: The links with dementia development . Protein Cell , 8 (2 ), 90 –102 . 10.1007/s13238-016-0338-6 
27866330 


Allen , A. P. 
, 
Dinan , T. G. 
, 
Clarke , G. 
, & 
Cryan , J. F. 
 (2017 ). A psychology of the human brain‐gut‐microbiome axis . Social and Personality Psychology Compass , 11 (4 ), e12309
10.1111/spc3.12309 
28804508 


Allen , B. 
, & 
Nowak , M. A. 
 (2013 ). Cooperation and the fate of microbial societies . PLoS Biology , 11 (4 ), e1001549
10.1371/journal.pbio.1001549 
23637573 


Almond , M. 
 (2013 ). Depression and inflammation: Examining the link . Current Psychiatry , 12 (6 ), 24 –32 .24443645 


Ananthaswamy , A. 
 (2011 ). Faecal transplant eases symptoms of Parkinson's disease . New Journal of Science , 209 , 8 –9 .


Anderson , G. 
, & 
Maes , M. 
 (2015 ). The gut–brain axis: The role of melatonin in linking psychiatric, inflammatory and neurodegenerative conditions . Advances in Integrative Medicine , 2 (1 ), 31 –37 . 10.1016/j.aimed.2014.12.007 



Anderson , R. C. 
, 
Cookson , A. L. 
, 
McNabb , W. C. 
, 
Park , Z. 
, 
McCann , M. J. 
, 
Kelly , W. J. 
, & 
Roy , N. C. 
 (2010 ). Lactobacillus plantarum MB452 enhances the function of the intestinal barrier by increasing the expression levels of genes involved in tight junction formation . BMC Microbiology , 10 , 316 
10.1186/1471-2180-10-316 
21143932 


Andreas , S. 
, 
Schulz , H. 
, 
Volkert , J. 
, 
Dehoust , M. 
, 
Sehner , S. 
, 
Suling , A. 
, … 
Härter , M. 
 (2017 ). Prevalence of mental disorders in elderly people: The European MentDis_ICF65+ study . The British Journal of Psychiatry , 210 (2 ), 125 –131 . 10.1192/bjp.bp.115.180463 
27609811 


Angst , J. 
, 
Merikangas , K. R. 
, & 
Preisig , M. 
 (1997 ). Subthreshold syndromes of depression and anxiety in the community . Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 58 (Suppl 8 ), 6 –10 .9236729 


Anisman , H. 
, & 
Zacharko , R. 
 (1982 ). Depression: The predisposing influence of stress . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 5 (1 ), 89 –99 . 10.1017/S0140525X00010633 



Arentsen , T. 
, 
Raith , H. 
, 
Qian , Y. 
, 
Forssberg , H. 
, & 
Diaz Heijtz , R. 
 (2015 ). Host microbiota modulates development of social preference in mice . Microbial Ecology in Health & Disease , 26 , 29719 
10.3402/mehd.v26.29719 
26679775 


Aroniadis , O. C. 
, & 
Brandt , L. J. 
 (2013 ). Fecal microbiota transplantation: Past, present and future . Current Opinion in Gastroenterology , 29 (1 ), 79 –84 . 10.1097/MOG.0b013e32835a4b3e 
23041678 


Arreola , R. 
, 
Becerril‐Villanueva , E. 
, 
Cruz‐Fuentes , C. 
, 
Velasco‐Velázquez , M. A. 
, 
Garcés‐Alvarez , M. E. 
, 
Hurtado‐Alvarado , G. 
, … 
Pavón , L. 
 (2015 ). Immunomodulatory effects mediated by serotonin . Journal of Immunology Research , 2015 , 354957 
10.1155/2015/354957 
25961058 


Asnicar , F. 
, 
Manara , S. 
, 
Zolfo , M. 
, 
Truong , D. T. 
, 
Scholz , M. 
, 
Armanini , F. 
, … 
Segata , N. 
 (2017 ). Studying vertical microbiome transmission from mothers to infants by strain‐level metagenomic profiling . mSystems , 2 (1 ), e00164‐16
10.1128/mSystems.00164-16 
28144631 


Ayaz , M. 
, 
Subhan , F. 
, 
Ahmed , J. 
, 
Khan , A.‐U. 
, 
Ullah , F. 
, 
Ullah , I. 
, … 
Hussain , S. 
 (2015 ). Sertraline enhances the activity of antimicrobial agents against pathogens of clinical relevance . Journal of Biological Research‐Thessaloniki , 22 (1 ), 4 
10.1186/s40709-015-0028-1 



Bailey , M. T. 
, 
Dowd , S. E. 
, 
Galley , J. D. 
, 
Hufnagle , A. R. 
, 
Allen , R. G. 
, & 
Lyte , M. 
 (2011 ). Exposure to a social stressor alters the structure of the intestinal microbiota: Implications for stressor‐induced immunomodulation . Brain, Behavior, and Immunity , 25 (3 ), 397 –407 . 10.1016/j.bbi.2010.10.023 



Ballou , S. 
, 
Bedell , A. 
, & 
Keefer , L. 
 (2015 ). Psychosocial impact of irritable bowel syndrome: A brief review . World Journal of Gastrointestinal Pathophysiology , 6 (4 ), 120 –123 . 10.4291/wjgp.v6.i4.120 
26600969 


Behary , P. 
, & 
Miras , A. D. 
 (2015 ). Food preferences and underlying mechanisms after bariatric surgery . The Proceedings of the Nutrition Society , 74 (4 ), 419 –425 . 10.1017/s0029665115002074 
25990312 


Benton , D. 
, 
Williams , C. 
, & 
Brown , A. 
 (2007 ). Impact of consuming a milk drink containing a probiotic on mood and cognition . European Journal of Clinical Nutrition , 61 (3 ), 355 –361 . 10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602546 
17151594 


Bercik , P. 
, 
Park , A. J. 
, 
Sinclair , D. 
, 
Khoshdel , A. 
, 
Lu , J. 
, 
Huang , X. 
, … 
Verdu , E. F. 
 (2011 ). The anxiolytic effect of Bifidobacterium longum NCC3001 involves vagal pathways for gut‐brain communication . Neurogastroenterology and Motility , 23 (12 ), 1132 –1139 . 10.1111/j.1365-2982.2011.01796.x 
21988661 


Berger , M. 
, 
Juster , R. P. 
, & 
Sarnyai , Z. 
 (2015 ). Mental health consequences of stress and trauma: Allostatic load markers for practice and policy with a focus on Indigenous health . Australas Psychiatry , 23 (6 ), 644 –649 . 10.1177/1039856215608281 
26432654 


Berkes , J. 
, 
Viswanathan , V. K. 
, 
Savkovic , S. D. 
, & 
Hecht , G. 
 (2003 ). Intestinal epithelial responses to enteric pathogens: Effects on the tight junction barrier, ion transport, and inflammation . Gut , 52 (3 ), 439 –451 . 10.1136/gut.52.3.439 
12584232 


Biagi , E. 
, 
Nylund , L. 
, 
Candela , M. 
, 
Ostan , R. 
, 
Bucci , L. 
, 
Pini , E. 
, … 
De Vos , W. 
 (2010 ). Through ageing, and beyond: Gut microbiota and inflammatory status in seniors and centenarians . PLoS ONE , 5 (5 ), e10667
10.1371/journal.pone.0010667 
20498852 


Bischoff , S. C. 
, 
Barbara , G. 
, 
Buurman , W. 
, 
Ockhuizen , T. 
, 
Schulzke , J.‐D. 
, 
Serino , M. 
, … 
Wells , J. M. 
 (2014 ). Intestinal permeability – a new target for disease prevention and therapy . BMC Gastroenterology , 14 (1 ), 189 
10.1186/s12876-014-0189-7 
25407511 


Blumstein , D. T. 
, 
Levy , K. 
, 
Mayer , E. 
, & 
Harte , J. 
 (2014 ). Gastrointestinal dysbiosis . Evolution, Medicine, and Public Health , 2014 (1 ), 163 
10.1093/emph/eou029 



Boersma , K. 
, 
Ljótsson , B. 
, 
Edebol‐Carlman , H. 
, 
Schrooten , M. 
, 
Linton , S. J. 
, & 
Brummer , R. J. 
 (2016 ). Exposure‐based cognitive behavioral therapy for irritable bowel syndrome. A single‐case experimental design across 13 subjects . Cognitive Behaviour Therapy , 45 (6 ), 415 –430 . 10.1080/16506073.2016.1194455 
27285475 


Boonstra , E. 
, 
de Kleijn , R. 
, 
Colzato , L. S. 
, 
Alkemade , A. 
, 
Forstmann , B. U. 
, & 
Nieuwenhuis , S. 
 (2015 ). Neurotransmitters as food supplements: The effects of GABA on brain and behavior . Frontiers in Psychology , 6 , 1520 
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01520 
26500584 


Borody , T. J. 
, 
Nowak , A. 
, & 
Finlayson , S. 
 (2012 ). The GI microbiome and its role in chronic fatigue syndrome: A summary of bacteriotherapy . Journal of the Australasian College of Nutritional and Environmental Medicine , 31 (3 ), 3 –8 .


Borre , Y. E. 
, 
O'Keeffe , G. W. 
, 
Clarke , G. 
, 
Stanton , C. 
, 
Dinan , T. G. 
, & 
Cryan , J. F. 
 (2014 ). Microbiota and neurodevelopmental windows: Implications for brain disorders . Trends in Molecular Medicine , 20 (9 ), 509 –518 . 10.1016/j.molmed.2014.05.002 
24956966 


Bourassa , M. W. 
, 
Alim , I. 
, 
Bultman , S. J. 
, & 
Ratan , R. R. 
 (2016 ). Butyrate, neuroepigenetics and the gut microbiome: Can a high fiber diet improve brain health? 
Neuroscience Letters , 625 , 56 –63 . 10.1016/j.neulet.2016.02.009 
26868600 


Brandt , L. J. 
, & 
Aroniadis , O. C. 
 (2013 ). An overview of fecal microbiota transplantation: Techniques, indications, and outcomes . Gastrointestinal Endoscopy , 78 (2 ), 240 –249 . 10.1016/j.gie.2013.03.1329 
23642791 


Braniste , V. 
, 
Al‐Asmakh , M. 
, 
Kowal , C. 
, 
Anuar , F. 
, 
Abbaspour , A. 
, 
Toth , M. 
, … 
Pettersson , S. 
 (2014 ). The gut microbiota influences blood‐brain barrier permeability in mice . Science Translational Medicine , 6 (263 ), 263ra158 
10.1126/scitranslmed.3009759 



Bravo , J. A. 
, 
Forsythe , P. 
, 
Chew , M. V. 
, 
Escaravage , E. 
, 
Savignac , H. M. 
, 
Dinan , T. G. 
, … 
Cryan , J. F. 
 (2011 ). Ingestion of Lactobacillus strain regulates emotional behavior and central GABA receptor expression in a mouse via the vagus nerve . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA , 108 (38 ), 16050 –16055 . 10.1073/pnas.1102999108 



Broussard , J. L. 
, & 
Devkota , S. 
 (2016 ). The changing microbial landscape of Western society: Diet, dwellings and discordance . Molecular Metabolism , 5 (9 ), 737 –742 . 10.1016/j.molmet.2016.07.007 
27617196 


Buford , T. W. 
 (2017 ). (Dis)Trust your gut: The gut microbiome in age‐related inflammation, health, and disease . Microbiome , 5 (1 ), 80 
10.1186/s40168-017-0296-0 
28709450 


Bunnik , E. M. 
, 
Aarts , N. 
, & 
Chen , L. A. 
 (2017 ). Physicians must discuss potential long‐term risks of fecal microbiota transplantation to ensure informed consent . The American Journal of Bioethics , 17 (5 ), 61 –63 . 10.1080/15265161.2017.1299816 



Burch , J. D. 
 (2016 ). Intestinal infection associated with future onset of an anxiety disorder: Results of a nationally representative study . Brain, Behaviour, and Immunity , 57 , 222 –226 . 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.05.014 



Byrne , C. S. 
, 
Chambers , E. S. 
, 
Morrison , D. J. 
, & 
Frost , G. 
 (2015 ). The role of short chain fatty acids in appetite regulation and energy homeostasis . International Journal of Obesity , 39 (9 ), 1331 –1338 . 10.1038/ijo.2015.84 
25971927 


Bystritsky , A. 
, 
Khalsa , S. S. 
, 
Cameron , M. E. 
, & 
Schiffman , J. 
 (2013 ). Current diagnosis and treatment of anxiety disorders . Pharmacology & Therapeutics , 38 (1 ), 30 –57 .


Campell , A. W. 
 (2014 ). Autoimmunity and the gut . Autoimmune Diseases , 2014 , 1 –12 . 10.1155/2014/152428 



Canani , R. B. 
, 
Di Costanzo , M. 
, & 
Leone , L. 
 (2012 ). The epigenetic effects of butyrate: Potential therapeutic implications for clinical practice . Clinical Epigenetics , 4 (1 ), 4 
10.1186/1868-7083-4-4 
22414433 


Canavan , C. 
, 
West , J. 
, & 
Card , T. 
 (2015 ). Change in quality of life for patients with irritable bowel syndrome following referral to a gastroenterologist: A cohort study . PLoS ONE , 10 (10 ), e0139389
10.1371/journal.pone.0139389 
26431458 


Cani , P. D. 
, 
Lecourt , E. 
, 
Dewulf , E. M. 
, 
Sohet , F. M. 
, 
Pachikian , B. D. 
, 
Naslain , D. 
, … 
Delzenne , N. M. 
 (2009 ). Gut microbiota fermentation of prebiotics increases satietogenic and incretin gut peptide production with consequences for appetite sensation and glucose response after a meal . American Journal of Clinical Nutrition , 90 (5 ), 1236 –1243 . 10.3945/ajcn.2009.28095 
19776140 


Carabotti , M. 
, 
Scirocco , A. 
, 
Maselli , M. A. 
, & 
Severi , C. 
 (2015 ). The gut‐brain axis: Interactions between enteric microbiota, central and enteric nervous systems . Annals of Gastroenterology , 28 (2 ), 203 –209 .25830558 


Castro‐Nallar , E. 
, 
Bendall , M. L. 
, 
Pérez‐Losada , M. 
, 
Sabuncyan , S. 
, 
Severance , E. G. 
, 
Dickerson , F. B. 
, … 
Crandall , K. A. 
 (2015 ). Composition, taxonomy and functional diversity of the oropharynx microbiome in individuals with schizophrenia and controls . PeerJ , 3 , e1140
10.7717/peerj.1140 
26336637 


Chambers , E. S. 
, 
Viardot , A. 
, 
Psichas , A. 
, 
Morrison , D. J. 
, 
Murphy , K. G. 
, 
Zac‐Varghese , S. E. K. 
, … 
Frost , G. 
 (2015 ). Effects of targeted delivery of propionate to the human colon on appetite regulation, body weight maintenance and adiposity in overweight adults . Gut , 64 (11 ), 1744 –1754 . 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-307913 
25500202 


Cherlyn , S. Y. 
, 
Woon , P. S. 
, 
Liu , J. J. 
, 
Ong , W. Y. 
, 
Tsai , G. C. 
, & 
Sim , K. 
 (2010 ). Genetic association studies of glutamate, GABA and related genes in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: A decade of advance . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews , 34 (6 ), 958 –977 . 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.01.002 
20060416 


Choi , M.‐H. 
, 
Kim , H.‐S. 
, 
Gim , S.‐Y. 
, 
Kim , W.‐R. 
, 
Mun , K.‐R. 
, 
Tack , G.‐R. 
, … 
Chung , S.‐C. 
 (2016 ). Differences in cognitive ability and hippocampal volume between Alzheimer's disease, amnestic mild cognitive impairment, and healthy control groups, and their correlation . Neuroscience Letters , 620 , 115 –120 . 10.1016/j.neulet.2016.03.044 
27019036 


Christensen , L. 
, & 
Brooks , A. 
 (2006 ). Changing food preference as a function of mood . Journal of Psychology , 140 (4 ), 293 –306 . 10.3200/jrlp.140.4.293-306 
16967737 


Clarke , G. 
, 
Stilling , R. M. 
, 
Kennedy , P. J. 
, 
Stanton , C. 
, 
Cryan , J. F. 
, & 
Dinan , T. G. 
 (2014 ). Minireview: Gut microbiota: The neglected endocrine organ . Molecular Endocrinology , 28 (8 ), 1221 –1238 . 10.1210/me.2014-1108 
24892638 


Collins , S. M. 
, 
Kassam , Z. 
, & 
Bercik , P. 
 (2013 ). The adoptive transfer of behavioral phenotype via the intestinal microbiota: Experimental evidence and clinical implications . Current Opinion in Microbiology , 16 (3 ), 240 –245 . 10.1016/j.mib.2013.06.004 
23845749 


Corcoran , C. 
, 
Walker , E. 
, 
Huot , R. 
, 
Mittal , V. 
, 
Tessner , K. 
, 
Kestler , L. 
, & 
Malaspina , D. 
 (2003 ). The stress cascade and schizophrenia: Etiology and onset . Schizophrenia Bulletin , 29 (4 ), 671 –692 . 10.1093/oxfordjournals.schbul.a007038 
14989406 


Cox , L. M. 
, 
Yamanishi , S. 
, 
Sohn , J. 
, 
Alekseyenko , A. V. 
, 
Leung , J. M. 
, 
Cho , I. 
, … 
Blaser , M. J. 
 (2014 ). Altering the intestinal microbiota during a critical developmental window has lasting metabolic consequences . Cell , 158 (4 ), 705 –721 . 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.052 
25126780 


Craig , A. D. 
 (2002 ). How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the body . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 3 (8 ), 655 –666 . 10.1038/nrn894 
12154366 


Cryan , J. F. 
, & 
Dinan , T. G. 
 (2012 ). Mind‐altering microorganisms: The impact of the gut microbiota on brain and behaviour . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 13 (10 ), 701 –712 . 10.1038/nrn3346 
22968153 


Cryan , J. F. 
, & 
O'Mahony , S. M. 
 (2011 ). The microbiome‐gut‐brain axis: From bowel to behavior . Neurogastroenterology and Motility , 23 (3 ), 187 –192 . 10.1111/j.1365-2982.2010.01664.x 
21303428 


Cui , L. 
, 
Zhao , T. 
, 
Hu , H. 
, 
Zhang , W. 
, & 
Hua , X. 
 (2017 ). Association study of gut flora in coronary heart disease through high‐throughput sequencing . BioMed Research International , 2017 , 3796359
10.1155/2017/3796359 
28497047 


Dąbrowska , K. 
, & 
Witkiewicz , W. 
 (2016 ). Correlations of host genetics and gut microbiome composition . Frontiers in Microbiology , 7 , 1357 
10.3389/fmicb.2016.01357 
27625642 


Darmon , N. 
, & 
Drewnowski , A. 
 (2008 ). Does social class predict diet quality? 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition , 87 (5 ), 1107 –1117 . 10.1093/ajcn/87.5.1107 
18469226 


David , L. A. 
, 
Maurice , C. F. 
, 
Carmody , R. N. 
, 
Gootenberg , D. B. 
, 
Button , J. E. 
, 
Wolfe , B. E. 
, … 
Turnbaugh , P. J. 
 (2014 ). Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome . Nature , 505 (7484 ), 559 –563 . 10.1038/nature12820 
24336217 


De Filippo , C. 
, 
Di Paola , M. 
, 
Ramazzotti , M. 
, 
Albanese , D. 
, 
Pieraccini , G. 
, 
Banci , E. 
, … 
Lionetti , P. 
 (2017 ). Diet, environments, and gut microbiota: A preliminary investigation in children living in rural and urban Burkina Faso and Italy . Frontiers in Microbiology , 8 , 1979 
10.3389/fmicb.2017.01979 
29081768 


DeGruttola , A. K. 
, 
Low , D. 
, 
Mizoguchi , A. 
, & 
Mizoguchi , E. 
 (2016 ). Current understanding of dysbiosis in disease in human and animal models . Inflammatory Bowel Diseases , 22 (5 ), 1137 –1150 . 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000750 
27070911 


den Besten , G. 
, 
van Eunen , K. 
, 
Groen , A. K. 
, 
Venema , K. 
, 
Reijngoud , D. J. 
, & 
Bakker , B. M. 
 (2013 ). The role of short‐chain fatty acids in the interplay between diet, gut microbiota, and host energy metabolism . Journal of Lipid Research , 54 (9 ), 2325 –2340 . 10.1194/jlr.R036012 
23821742 


Desbonnet , L. 
, 
Garrett , L. 
, 
Clarke , G. 
, 
Kiely , B. 
, 
Cryan , J. F. 
, & 
Dinan , T. G. 
 (2010 ). Effects of the probiotic Bifidobacterium infantis in the maternal separation model of depression . Neuroscience , 170 (4 ), 1179 –1188 . 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.08.005 
20696216 


Di Chiara , G. 
, & 
Bassareo , V. 
 (2007 ). Reward system and addiction: What dopamine does and doesn't do . Current Opinion in Pharmacology , 7 (1 ), 69 –76 . 10.1016/j.coph.2006.11.003 
17174602 


Dinan , T. G. 
, 
Stanton , C. 
, & 
Cryan , J. F. 
 (2013 ). Psychobiotics: A novel class of psychotropic . Biological Psychiatry , 74 (10 ), 720 –726 . 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.05.001 
23759244 


Eisenberg , D. 
, 
Golberstein , E. 
, & 
Hunt Justin , B. 
 (2009 ). Mental health and academic success in college . The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy , 9 (1 ), 1 –37 . 10.2202/1935-1682.2191 
20098633 


Eisenhofer , G. 
, 
Åneman , A. 
, 
Friberg , P. 
, 
Hooper , D. 
, 
Fåndriks , L. 
, 
Lonroth , H. 
, … 
Mezey , E. 
 (1997 ). Substantial production of dopamine in the human gastrointestinal tract . The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism , 82 (11 ), 3864 –3871 . 10.1210/jcem.82.11.4339 
9360553 


Emoto , T. 
, 
Yamashita , T. 
, 
Kobayashi , T. 
, 
Sasaki , N. 
, 
Hirota , Y. 
, 
Hayashi , T. 
, … 
Hirata , K.‐I. 
 (2017 ). Characterization of gut microbiota profiles in coronary artery disease patients using data mining analysis of terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism: Gut microbiota could be a diagnostic marker of coronary artery disease . Heart and Vessels , 32 (1 ), 39 –46 . 10.1007/s00380-016-0841-y 
27125213 


Enright , E. F. 
, 
Joyce , S. A. 
, 
Gahan , C. G. 
, & 
Griffin , B. T. 
 (2017 ). Impact of gut microbiota‐mediated bile acid metabolism on the solubilization capacity of bile salt micelles and drug solubility . Molecular Pharmaceutics , 14 (4 ), 1251 –1263 . 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b01155 
28186768 


Evrensel , A. 
, & 
Ceylan , M. E. 
 (2015 ). The gut‐brain axis: The missing link in depression . Clinical Psychopharmacology and Neuroscience , 13 (3 ), 239 –244 . 10.9758/cpn.2015.13.3.239 
26598580 


Evrensel , A. 
, & 
Ceylan , M. E. 
 (2016 ). Fecal microbiota transplantation and its usage in neuropsychiatric disorders . Clinical Psychopharmacology and Neuroscience , 14 (3 ), 231 –237 . 10.9758/cpn.2016.14.3.231 
27489376 


Fasano , A. 
 (2012 ). Intestinal permeability and its regulation by zonulin: Diagnostic and therapeutic implications . Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology , 10 (10 ), 1096 –1100 . 10.1016/j.cgh.2012.08.012 
22902773 


Femenía , T. 
, 
Gómez‐Galán , M. 
, 
Lindskog , M. 
, & 
Magara , S. 
 (2012 ). Dysfunctional hippocampal activity affects emotion and cognition in mood disorders . Brain Research , 1476 , 58 –70 . 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.03.053 
22541166 


Ferguson , E. 
 (2013 ). Personality is of central concern to understand health: Towards a theoretical model for health psychology . Health Psychology Review , 7 (Suppl 1 ), S32 –S70 . 10.1080/17437199.2010.547985 
23772230 


Ferguson , J. M. 
 (2001 ). SSRI antidepressant medications: adverse effects and tolerability . Primary Care Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 3 (1 ), 22 –27 . 10.4088/PCC.v03n0105 



Finegold , S. M. 
, 
Molitoris , D. 
, 
Song , Y. 
, 
Liu , C. 
, 
Vaisanen , M.‐L. 
, 
Bolte , E. 
, … 
Kaul , A. 
 (2002 ). Gastrointestinal microflora studies in late‐onset autism . Clinical Infectious Diseases , 35 (Suppl 1 ), S6 –S16 . 10.1086/341914 
12173102 


Fiorentino , M. 
, 
Sapone , A. 
, 
Senger , S. 
, 
Camhi , S. S. 
, 
Kadzielski , S. M. 
, 
Buie , T. M. 
, … 
Fasano , A. 
 (2016 ). Blood‐brain barrier and intestinal epithelial barrier alterations in autism spectrum disorders . Molecular Autism , 7 , 49 
10.1186/s13229-016-0110-z 
27957319 


Fletcher , J. M. 
 (2010 ). Adolescent depression and educational attainment: Results using sibling fixed effects . Health Economics , 19 (7 ), 855 –871 . 10.1002/hec.1526 
19582699 


Fornaro , M. 
, 
Prestia , D. 
, 
Colicchio , S. 
, & 
Perugi , G. 
 (2010 ). A systematic, updated review on the antidepressant agomelatine focusing on its melatonergic modulation . Current Neuropharmacology , 8 (3 ), 287 –304 . 10.2174/157015910792246227 
21358978 


Franceschi , C. 
, 
Capri , M. 
, 
Monti , D. 
, 
Giunta , S. 
, 
Olivieri , F. 
, 
Sevini , F. 
, … 
Salvioli , S. 
 (2007 ). Inflammaging and anti‐inflammaging: A systemic perspective on aging and longevity emerged from studies in humans . Mechanisms of Ageing and Development , 128 (1 ), 92 –105 . 10.1016/j.mad.2006.11.016 
17116321 


Freestone , P. 
 (2013 ). Communication between bacteria and their hosts . Scientifica , 2013 , 1 –15 . 10.1155/2013/361073 



Fremont , M. 
, 
Coomans , D. 
, 
Massart , S. 
, & 
De Meirleir , K. 
 (2013 ). High‐throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing reveals alterations of intestinal microbiota in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients . Anaerobe , 22 , 50 –56 . 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2013.06.002 
23791918 


Friedrich , M. 
 (2017 ). Depression is the leading cause of disability around the world . JAMA , 317 (15 ), 1517 
10.1001/jama.2017.3826 



Frodl , T. 
, 
Schaub , A. 
, 
Banac , S. 
, 
Charypar , M. 
, 
Jäger , M. 
, 
Kümmler , P. 
, … 
Meisenzahl , E. M. 
 (2006 ). Reduced hippocampal volume correlates with executive dysfunctioning in major depression . Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience , 31 (5 ), 316 –325 .16951734 


Furet , J.‐P. 
, 
Kong , L.‐C. 
, 
Tap , J. 
, 
Poitou , C. 
, 
Basdevant , A. 
, 
Bouillot , J.‐L. 
, … 
Clement , K. 
 (2010 ). Differential adaptation of human gut microbiota to bariatric surgery‐induced weight loss: Links with metabolic and low‐grade inflammation markers . Diabetes , 59 (12 ), 3049 –3057 . 10.2337/db10-0253 
20876719 


Furusawa , Y. 
, 
Obata , Y. 
, 
Fukuda , S. 
, 
Endo , T. A. 
, 
Nakato , G. 
, 
Takahashi , D. 
, … 
Ohno , H. 
 (2013 ). Commensal microbe‐derived butyrate induces the differentiation of colonic regulatory T cells . Nature , 504 (7480 ), 446 –450 . 10.1038/nature12721 
24226770 


Gagniere , J. 
, 
Raisch , J. 
, 
Veziant , J. 
, 
Barnich , N. 
, 
Bonnet , R. 
, 
Buc , E. 
, … 
Bonnet , M. 
 (2016 ). Gut microbiota imbalance and colorectal cancer . World Journal of Gastroenterology , 22 (2 ), 501 –518 . 10.3748/wjg.v22.i2.501 
26811603 


Garakani , A. 
, 
Win , T. 
, 
Virk , S. 
, 
Gupta , S. 
, 
Kaplan , D. 
, & 
Masand , P. S. 
 (2003 ). Comorbidity of irritable bowel syndrome in psychiatric patients: A review . American Journal of Therapeutics , 10 (1 ), 61 –67 . 10.1097/00045391-200301000-00014 
12522523 


Garcia‐Mantrana , I. 
, 
Selma‐Royo , M. 
, 
Alcantara , C. 
, & 
Collado , M. C. 
 (2018 ). Shifts on gut microbiota associated to mediterranean diet adherence and specific dietary intakes on general adult population . Frontiers in Microbiology , 9 , 890 
10.3389/fmicb.2018.00890 
29867803 


Garrett , W. S. 
 (2015 ). Cancer and the microbiota . Science , 348 (6230 ), 80 –86 . 10.1126/science.aaa4972 
25838377 


Ghorbani , A. 
, 
Salari , M. 
, 
Shaygannejad , V. 
, & 
Norouzi , R. 
 (2013 ). The role of melatonin in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis: A case‐control study . International Journal of Preventive Medicine , 4 (Suppl 2 ), S180 –S184 .23776720 


Giunta , B. 
, 
Fernandez , F. 
, 
Nikolic , W. V. 
, 
Obregon , D. 
, 
Rrapo , E. 
, 
Town , T. 
, & 
Tan , J. 
 (2008 ). Inflammaging as a prodrome to Alzheimer's disease . Journal of Neuroinflammation , 5 , 51 
10.1186/1742-2094-5-51 
19014446 


Glanz , K. 
, 
Basil , M. 
, 
Maibach , E. 
, 
Goldberg , J. 
, & 
Snyder , D. 
 (1998 ). Why Americans eat what they do: Taste, nutrition, cost, convenience, and weight control concerns as influences on food consumption . Journal of the American Dietetic Association , 98 (10 ), 1118 –1126 . 10.1016/s0002-8223(98)00260-0 
9787717 


Gluckman , P. D. 
, 
Low , F. M. 
, 
Buklijas , T. 
, 
Hanson , M. A. 
, & 
Beedle , A. S. 
 (2011 ). How evolutionary principles improve the understanding of human health and disease . Evolutionary Applications , 4 (2 ), 249 –263 . 10.1111/j.1752-4571.2010.00164.x 
25567971 


Goodrich , J. K. 
, 
Waters , J. L. 
, 
Poole , A. C. 
, 
Sutter , J. L. 
, 
Koren , O. 
, 
Blekhman , R. 
, … 
Ley , R. E. 
 (2014 ). Human genetics shape the gut microbiome . Cell , 159 (4 ), 789 –799 . 10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.053 
25417156 


Grace , A. A. 
 (2016 ). Dysregulation of the dopamine system in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and depression . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 17 (8 ), 524 –532 . 10.1038/nrn.2016.57 
27256556 


Grenham , S. 
, 
Clarke , G. 
, 
Cryan , J. F. 
, & 
Dinan , T. G. 
 (2011 ). Brain‐gut‐microbe communication in health and disease . Frontiers in Physiology , 2 , 94 
10.3389/fphys.2011.00094 
22162969 


Gulesserian , T. 
, 
Engidawork , E. 
, 
Cairns , N. 
, & 
Lubec , G. 
 (2000 ). Increased protein levels of serotonin transporter in frontal cortex of patients with Down syndrome . Neuroscience Letters , 296 (1 ), 53 –57 . 10.1016/S0304-3940(00)01624-4 
11099832 


Gur , T. L. 
, 
Worly , B. L. 
, & 
Bailey , M. T. 
 (2015 ). Stress and the commensal microbiota: Importance in parturition and infant neurodevelopment . Frontiers in Psychiatry , 6 , 5 
10.3389/fpsyt.2015.00005 
25698977 


Hakansson , A. 
, & 
Molin , G. 
 (2011 ). Gut microbiota and inflammation . Nutrients , 3 (6 ), 637 –682 . 10.3390/nu3060637 
22254115 


Halford , J. C. 
, & 
Blundell , J. E. 
 (2000 ). Separate systems for serotonin and leptin in appetite control . Annals of Medicine , 32 (3 ), 222 –232 . 10.3109/07853890008998829 
10821329 


Haller , H. 
, 
Cramer , H. 
, 
Lauche , R. 
, 
Gass , F. 
, & 
Dobos , G. J. 
 (2014 ). The prevalence and burden of subthreshold generalized anxiety disorder: A systematic review . BMC Psychiatry , 14 (128 ), 1 –13 . 10.1186/1471-244X-14-128 



Harvey , S. B. 
, 
Deady , M. 
, 
Wang , M. 
, 
Mykletun , A. 
, 
Butterworth , P. 
, 
Christensen , H. 
, & 
Mitchell , P. B. 
 (2017 ). Is the prevalence of mental illness increasing in Australia? Evidence from national health surveys and administrative data, 2001–2004 . Medical Journal of Australia , 206 (11 ), 490 –493 . 10.5694/mja16.00295 
28918719 


Heiman , M. L. 
, & 
Greenway , F. L. 
 (2016 ). A healthy gastrointestinal microbiome is dependent on dietary diversity . Molecular Metabolism , 5 (5 ), 317 –320 . 10.1016/j.molmet.2016.02.005 
27110483 


Hibbing , M. E. 
, 
Fuqua , C. 
, 
Parsek , M. R. 
, & 
Peterson , S. B. 
 (2010 ). Bacterial competition: Surviving and thriving in the microbial jungle . Nature Reviews Microbiology , 8 (1 ), 15 –25 . 10.1038/nrmicro2259 
19946288 


Holzer , P. 
 (2017 ). Interoception and gut feelings: Unconscious body signals' impact on brain function, behavior and belief processes In Angel H.‐F.  , Oviedo L.  , Paloutzian R. F.  , Runehov A. L. C.  , & Seitz R. J.   (Eds.), New approaches to the scientific study of religion: Vol. 1. Processes of believing: The acquisition, maintenance, and change in creditions  (pp. 435 –442 ). Cham, Switzerland : Springer International Publishing .


Holzer , P. 
, & 
Farzi , A. 
 (2014 ). Neuropeptides and the microbiota‐gut‐brain axis . Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology , 817 , 195 –219 . 10.1007/978-1-4939-0897-4_9 
24997035 


Hood , S. D. 
, 
Hince , D. A. 
, 
Robinson , H. 
, 
Cirillo , M. 
, 
Christmas , D. 
, & 
Kaye , J. M. 
 (2006 ). Serotonin regulation of the human stress response . Psychoneuroendocrinology , 31 (9 ), 1087 –1097 . 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2006.07.001 
16962720 


Houghteling , P. D. 
, & 
Walker , W. A. 
 (2015 ). Why is initial bacterial colonization of the intestine important to the infant's and child's health? 
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition , 60 (3 ), 294 –307 . 10.1097/MPG.0000000000000597 
25313849 


Hyland , N. P. 
, & 
Cryan , J. F. 
 (2010 ). A gut feeling about GABA: Focus on GABA(B) receptors . Frontiers in Pharmacology , 1 , 124 
10.3389/fphar.2010.00124 
21833169 


Hyman , S. E. 
 (2000 ). The genetics of mental illness: Implications for practice . Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 78 (4 ), 455 –463 .10885164 


Jacka , F. N. 
, 
Cherbuin , N. 
, 
Anstey , K. J. 
, 
Sachdev , P. 
, & 
Butterworth , P. 
 (2015 ). Western diet is associated with a smaller hippocampus: A longitudinal investigation . BMC Medicine , 13 , 215 
10.1186/s12916-015-0461-x 
26349802 


Jacka , F. N. 
, 
Kremer , P. J. 
, 
Berk , M. 
, 
de Silva‐Sanigorski , A. M. 
, 
Moodie , M. 
, 
Leslie , E. R. 
, … 
Swinburn , B. A. 
 (2011 ). A prospective study of diet quality and mental health in adolescents . PLoS ONE , 6 (9 ), e24805
10.1371/journal.pone.0024805 
21957462 


Jacka , F. N. 
, 
Mykletun , A. 
, 
Berk , M. 
, 
Bjelland , I. 
, & 
Tell , G. S. 
 (2011 ). The association between habitual diet quality and the common mental disorders in community‐dwelling adults: The Hordaland Health study . Psychosomatic Medicine , 73 (6 ), 483 –490 . 10.1097/PSY.0b013e318222831a 
21715296 


Jacka , F. N. 
, 
O'Neil , A. 
, 
Opie , R. 
, 
Itsiopoulos , C. 
, 
Cotton , S. 
, 
Mohebbi , M. 
, … 
Berk , M. 
 (2017 ). A randomised controlled trial of dietary improvement for adults with major depression (the ‘SMILES’ trial) . BMC Medicine , 15 (1 ), 23 
10.1186/s12916-017-0791-y 
28137247 


James , G. D. 
 (2013 ). Ambulatory blood pressure variation: Allostasis and adaptation . Autonomic Neuroscience , 177 (2 ), 87 –94 . 10.1016/j.autneu.2013.03.012 
23639817 


Jangi , S. 
, 
Gandhi , R. 
, 
Cox , L. M. 
, 
Li , N. 
, 
von Glehn , F. 
, 
Yan , R. 
, … 
Weiner , H. L. 
 (2016 ). Alterations of the human gut microbiome in multiple sclerosis . Nature Communications , 7 , 12015
10.1038/ncomms12015 



Jeffery , I. B. 
, 
O'Toole , P. W. 
, 
Ohman , L. 
, 
Claesson , M. J. 
, 
Deane , J. 
, 
Quigley , E. M. 
, & 
Simren , M. 
 (2012 ). An irritable bowel syndrome subtype defined by species‐specific alterations in faecal microbiota . Gut , 61 (7 ), 997 –1006 . 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301501 
22180058 


Jenkins , T. A. 
, 
Nguyen , J. C. 
, 
Polglaze , K. E. 
, & 
Bertrand , P. P. 
 (2016 ). Influence of tryptophan and serotonin on mood and cognition with a possible role of the gut‐brain axis . Nutrients , 8 (1 ), 56 
10.3390/nu8010056 



Jiang , H. 
, 
Ling , Z. 
, 
Zhang , Y. 
, 
Mao , H. 
, 
Ma , Z. 
, 
Yin , Y. 
, … 
Ruan , B. 
 (2015 ). Altered fecal microbiota composition in patients with major depressive disorder . Brain, Behavior, and Immunity , 48 , 186 –194 . 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.03.016 



Johansen , T. 
, & 
Dittrich , W. H. 
 (2013 ). Cognitive performance in a subclinical obsessive‐compulsive sample 1: Cognitive functions . Psychiatry Journal , 1 , 1 –10 . 10.1155/2013/565191 



Jumbe , S. 
, 
Hamlet , C. 
, & 
Meyrick , J. 
 (2017 ). Psychological aspects of bariatric surgery as a treatment for obesity . Current Obesity Reports , 6 (1 ), 71 –78 . 10.1007/s13679-017-0242-2 
28243838 


Kalayci , S. 
, 
Demirci , S. 
, & 
Sahin , F. 
 (2014 ). Determination of antimicrobial properties of picaridin and DEET against a broad range of microorganisms . World Journal of Microbiology & Biotechnology , 30 (2 ), 407 –411 . 10.1007/s11274-013-1456-4 
23933806 


Kali , A. 
 (2016 ). Psychobiotics: An emerging probiotic in psychiatric practice . Biomedical Journal , 39 (3 ), 223 –224 . 10.1016/j.bj.2015.11.004 
27621125 


Kallivayalil , R. A. 
 (2008 ). Are we over‐dependent on pharmacotherapy? 
Indian J Psychiatry , 50 (1 ), 7 –9 . 10.4103/0019-5545.39750 
19771299 


Karlsson , J. 
, 
Sjostrom , L. 
, & 
Sullivan , M. 
 (1998 ). Swedish obese subjects (SOS)–an intervention study of obesity. Two‐year follow‐up of health‐related quality of life (HRQL) and eating behavior after gastric surgery for severe obesity . International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders , 22 (2 ), 113 –126 .9504319 


Kelly , J. R. 
, 
Clarke , G. 
, 
Cryan , J. F. 
, & 
Dinan , T. G. 
 (2016 ). Brain‐gut‐microbiota axis: Challenges for translation in psychiatry . Annals of Epidemiology , 26 (5 ), 366 –372 . 10.1016/j.annepidem.2016.02.008 
27005587 


Khan , N. A. 
, 
Raine , L. B. 
, 
Drollette , E. S. 
, 
Scudder , M. R. 
, 
Kramer , A. F. 
, & 
Hillman , C. H. 
 (2015 ). Dietary fiber is positively associated with cognitive control among prepubertal children . Journal of Nutrition , 145 (1 ), 143 –149 . 10.3945/jn.114.198457 
25527669 


Kim , H. 
, 
Yun , Y. 
, 
Ryu , S. 
, 
Chang , Y. 
, 
Kwon , M. 
, 
Cho , J. 
, … 
Kim , H. 
 (2018 ). Correlation between gut microbiota and personality in adults: A cross‐sectional study . Brain, Behavior, and Immunity , 69 , 374 –385 . 10.1016/j.bbi.2017.12.012 



Kleiman , S. C. 
, 
Watson , H. J. 
, 
Bulik‐Sullivan , E. C. 
, 
Huh , E. Y. 
, 
Tarantino , L. M. 
, 
Bulik , C. M. 
, & 
Carroll , I. M. 
 (2015 ). The intestinal microbiota in acute anorexia nervosa and during renourishment: relationship to depression, anxiety, and eating disorder psychopathology . Psychosomatic Medicine , 77 (9 ), 969 –981 . 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000247 
26428446 


Knowles , S. R. 
, 
Nelson , E. A. 
, & 
Palombo , E. A. 
 (2008 ). Investigating the role of perceived stress on bacterial flora activity and salivary cortisol secretion: A possible mechanism underlying susceptibility to illness . Biological Psychology , 77 (2 ), 132 –137 . 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2007.09.010 
18023961 


Kolokotroni , O. 
, 
Middleton , N. 
, 
Gavatha , M. 
, 
Lamnisos , D. 
, 
Priftis , K. N. 
, & 
Yiallouros , P. K. 
 (2012 ). Asthma and atopy in children born by caesarean section: Effect modification by family history of allergies – a population based cross‐sectional study . BMC Pediatrics , 12 , 179 –179 . 10.1186/1471-2431-12-179 
23153011 


Kondo , T. 
, 
Kishi , M. 
, 
Fushimi , T. 
, 
Ugajin , S. 
, & 
Kaga , T. 
 (2009 ). Vinegar intake reduces body weight, body fat mass, and serum triglyceride levels in obese Japanese subjects . Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry , 73 (8 ), 1837 –1843 . 10.1271/bbb.90231 



Koopman , M. 
, & 
El Aidy , S. 
 (2017 ). Depressed gut? The microbiota‐diet‐inflammation trialogue in depression . Current Opinion in Psychiatry , 30 (5 ), 369 –377 . 10.1097/yco.0000000000000350 
28654462 


Krishnan , S. 
, 
Alden , N. 
, & 
Lee , K. 
 (2015 ). Pathways and functions of gut microbiota metabolism impacting host physiology . Current Opinion in Biotechnology , 36 , 137 –145 . 10.1016/j.copbio.2015.08.015 
26340103 


Kuhnke , D. 
, 
Jedlitschky , G. 
, 
Grube , M. 
, 
Krohn , M. 
, 
Jucker , M. 
, 
Mosyagin , I. 
, … 
Vogelgesang , S. 
 (2007 ). MDR1‐P‐glycoprotein (ABCB1) mediates transport of Alzheimer's Amyloid‐β peptides—implications for the mechanisms of Aβ clearance at the blood‐brain barrier . Brain Pathology , 17 (4 ), 347 –353 . 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2007.00075.x 
17610523 


Lai , J. S. 
, 
Hiles , S. 
, 
Bisquera , A. 
, 
Hure , A. J. 
, 
McEvoy , M. 
, & 
Attia , J. 
 (2014 ). A systematic review and meta‐analysis of dietary patterns and depression in community‐dwelling adults . American Journal of Clinical Nutrition , 99 (1 ), 181 –197 . 10.3945/ajcn.113.069880 
24196402 


Lam , Y. Y. 
, 
Maguire , S. 
, 
Palacios , T. 
, & 
Caterson , I. D. 
 (2017 ). Are the gut bacteria telling us to eat or not to eat? Reviewing the role of gut microbiota in the etiology, disease progression and treatment of eating disorders . Nutrients , 9 (6 ), 602 
10.3390/nu9060602 



Larsen , N. 
, 
Vogensen , F. K. 
, 
van den Berg , F. W. J. 
, 
Nielsen , D. S. 
, 
Andreasen , A. S. 
, 
Pedersen , B. K. 
, … 
Jakobsen , M. 
 (2010 ). Gut microbiota in human adults with type 2 diabetes differs from non‐diabetic adults . PLoS ONE , 5 (2 ), e9085
10.1371/journal.pone.0009085 
20140211 


Lee , J. 
, 
Duan , W. 
, & 
Mattson , M. P. 
 (2002 ). Evidence that brain‐derived neurotrophic factor is required for basal neurogenesis and mediates, in part, the enhancement of neurogenesis by dietary restriction in the hippocampus of adult mice . Journal of Neurochemistry , 82 (6 ), 1367 –1375 . 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2002.01085.x 
12354284 


Lee , Y.‐T. 
, 
Hu , L.‐Y. 
, 
Shen , C.‐C. 
, 
Huang , M.‐W. 
, 
Tsai , S.‐J. 
, 
Yang , A. C. 
, … 
Hung , J.‐H. 
 (2015 ). Risk of psychiatric disorders following irritable bowel syndrome: A nationwide population‐based cohort study . PLoS ONE , 10 (7 ), e0133283
10.1371/journal.pone.0133283 
26222511 


Leitão‐Gonçalves , R. 
, 
Carvalho‐Santos , Z. 
, 
Francisco , A. P. 
, 
Fioreze , G. T. 
, 
Anjos , M. 
, 
Baltazar , C. 
, … 
Ribeiro , C. 
 (2017 ). Commensal bacteria and essential amino acids control food choice behavior and reproduction . PLoS Biology , 15 (4 ), e2000862
10.1371/journal.pbio.2000862 
28441450 


Leonard , B. E. 
 (2010 ). The concept of depression as a dysfunction of the immune system . Current Immunology Reviews , 6 (3 ), 205 –212 . 10.2174/157339510791823835 
21170282 


Ley , R. E. 
, 
Turnbaugh , P. J. 
, 
Klein , S. 
, & 
Gordon , J. I. 
 (2006 ). Microbial ecology: Human gut microbes associated with obesity . Nature , 444 (7122 ), 1022 –1023 . 10.1038/4441022a 
17183309 


Lieberman , J. A. 
, 
Stroup , T. S. 
, 
McEvoy , J. P. 
, 
Swartz , M. S. 
, 
Rosenheck , R. A. 
, 
Perkins , D. O. 
, … 
Hsiao , J. K. 
 (2005 ). Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic schizophrenia . New England Journal of Medicine , 353 (12 ), 1209 –1223 . 10.1056/NEJMoa051688 
16172203 


Linneberg , A. 
, 
Nielsen , N. H. 
, 
Madsen , F. 
, 
Frølund , L. 
, 
Dirksen , A. 
, & 
Jørgensen , T. 
 (2000 ). Increasing prevalence of specific IgE to aeroallergens in an adult population: Two cross‐sectional surveys 8 years apart: The Copenhagen Allergy Study . The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology , 106 (2 ), 247 –252 . 10.1067/mai.2000.108312 
10932066 


Liou , A. P. 
, 
Paziuk , M. 
, 
Luevano , J.‐M. 
, 
Machineni , S. 
, 
Turnbaugh , P. J. 
, & 
Kaplan , L. M. 
 (2013 ). Conserved shifts in the gut microbiota due to gastric bypass reduce host weight and adiposity . Science Translational Medicine , 5 (178 ), 178ra141 
10.1126/scitranslmed.3005687 



Liu , Y. Z. 
, 
Wang , Y. X. 
, & 
Jiang , C. L. 
 (2017 ). Inflammation: The common pathway of stress‐related diseases . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 11 , 316 
10.3389/fnhum.2017.00316 
28676747 


Lloyd‐Price , J. 
, 
Abu‐Ali , G. 
, & 
Huttenhower , C. 
 (2016 ). The healthy human microbiome . Genome Medicine , 8 (1 ), 51 
10.1186/s13073-016-0307-y 
27122046 


Luczynski , P. 
, 
McVey Neufeld , K. A. 
, 
Oriach , C. S. 
, 
Clarke , G. 
, 
Dinan , T. G. 
, & 
Cryan , J. F. 
 (2016 ). Growing up in a bubble: Using germ‐free animals to assess the influence of the gut microbiota on brain and behavior . International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology , 19 (8 ), pyw020
10.1093/ijnp/pyw020 
26912607 


Lyte , M. 
 (2011 ). Probiotics function mechanistically as delivery vehicles for neuroactive compounds: Microbial endocrinology in the design and use of probiotics . BioEssays , 33 (8 ), 574 –581 . 10.1002/bies.201100024 
21732396 


Macedo , D. 
, 
Filho , A. J. 
, 
Soares de Sousa , C. N. 
, 
Quevedo , J. 
, 
Barichello , T. 
, 
Junior , H. V. 
, & 
Freitas de Lucena , D. 
 (2017 ). Antidepressants, antimicrobials or both? Gut microbiota dysbiosis in depression and possible implications of the antimicrobial effects of antidepressant drugs for antidepressant effectiveness . Journal of Affective Disorders , 208 , 22 –32 . 10.1016/j.jad.2016.09.012 
27744123 


Maes , M. 
, 
Kubera , M. 
, 
Leunis , J. C. 
, 
Berk , M. 
, 
Geffard , M. 
, & 
Bosmans , E. 
 (2013 ). In depression, bacterial translocation may drive inflammatory responses, oxidative and nitrosative stress (O&NS), and autoimmune responses directed against O&NS‐damaged neoepitopes . Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica , 127 (5 ), 344 –354 . 10.1111/j.1600-0447.2012.01908.x 
22900942 


Marks , D. M. 
, 
Shah , M. J. 
, 
Patkar , A. A. 
, 
Masand , P. S. 
, 
Park , G. Y. 
, & 
Pae , C. U. 
 (2009 ). Serotonin‐norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors for pain control: Premise and promise . Current Neuropharmacology , 7 (4 ), 331 –336 . 10.2174/157015909790031201 
20514212 


Markus , C. R. 
, 
Panhuysen , G. 
, 
Tuiten , A. 
, 
Koppeschaar , H. 
, 
Fekkes , D. 
, & 
Peters , M. L. 
 (1998 ). Does carbohydrate‐rich, protein‐poor food prevent a deterioration of mood and cognitive performance of stress‐prone subjects when subjected to a stressful task? 
Appetite , 31 (1 ), 49 –65 . 10.1006/appe.1997.0155 
9716435 


Marques , T. M. 
, 
Cryan , J. F. 
, 
Shanahan , F. 
, 
Fitzgerald , G. F. 
, 
Ross , R. P. 
, 
Dinan , T. G. 
, & 
Stanton , C. 
 (2014 ). Gut microbiota modulation and implications for host health: Dietary strategies to influence the gut–brain axis . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 22 , 239 –247 . 10.1016/j.ifset.2013.10.016 



Marvasti , F. F. 
, & 
Stafford , R. S. 
 (2012 ). From sick care to health care — reengineering prevention into the U.S. system . New England Journal of Medicine , 367 (10 ), 889 –891 . 10.1056/NEJMp1206230 
22931257 


Mathieson , F. 
, 
Collings , S. 
, & 
Dowell , A. 
 (2009 ). Sub‐threshold mental health syndromes: Finding an alternative to the medication of unhappiness . Journal of Primary Health Care , 1 (1 ), 74 –77 .20690494 


Mayer , E. A. 
 (2011 ). Gut feelings: The emerging biology of gut‐brain communication . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 12 (8 ), 453 –466 . 10.1038/nrn3071 
21750565 


Mayer , E. A. 
, 
Naliboff , B. D. 
, & 
Craig , A. D. 
 (2006 ). Neuroimaging of the brain‐gut axis: From basic understanding to treatment of functional GI disorders . Gastroenterology , 131 (6 ), 1925 –1942 . 10.1053/j.gastro.2006.10.026 
17188960 


Mayer , E. A. 
, & 
Tillisch , K. 
 (2011 ). The brain‐gut axis in abdominal pain syndromes . Annual Review of Medicine , 62 , 381 –396 . 10.1146/annurev-med-012309-103958 



Mazzoli , R. 
, & 
Pessione , E. 
 (2016 ). The neuro‐endocrinological role of microbial glutamate and GABA signaling . Frontiers in Microbiology , 7 , 1934 
10.3389/fmicb.2016.01934 
27965654 


McEwen , B. S. 
 (1998 ). Stress, adaptation, and disease. Allostasis and allostatic load . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 840 , 33 –44 . 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1998.tb09546.x 
9629234 


McEwen , B. S. 
 (2005 ). Stressed or stressed out: What is the difference? 
Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience , 30 (5 ), 315 –318 .16151535 


McEwen , B. S. 
, & 
Wingfield , J. C. 
 (2003 ). The concept of allostasis in biology and biomedicine . Hormones and Behavior , 43 (1 ), 2 –15 . 10.1016/S0018-506X(02)00024-7 
12614627 


McLeod , J. D. 
, & 
Fettes , D. L. 
 (2007 ). Trajectories of failure: The educational careers of children with mental health problems . American Journal of Sociology , 113 (3 ), 653 –701 . 10.1086/521849 



Meldrum , B. S. 
 (2000 ). Glutamate as a neurotransmitter in the brain: Review of physiology and pathology . Journal of Nutrition , 130 (4S Suppl ), 1007s –1015s . 10.1093/jn/130.4.1007S 
10736372 


Mendlowicz , M. V. 
, & 
Stein , M. B. 
 (2000 ). Quality of life in individuals with anxiety disorders . The American Journal of Psychiatry , 157 (5 ), 669 –682 . 10.1176/appi.ajp.157.5.669 
10784456 


Meneses , A. 
, & 
Liy‐Salmeron , G. 
 (2012 ). Serotonin and emotion, learning and memory . Reviews in the Neurosciences , 23 (5–6 ), 543 –553 . 10.1515/revneuro-2012-0060 
23104855 


Messaoudi , M. 
, 
Violle , N. 
, 
Bisson , J. F. 
, 
Desor , D. 
, 
Javelot , H. 
, & 
Rougeot , C. 
 (2011 ). Beneficial psychological effects of a probiotic formulation (Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 and Bifidobacterium longum R0175) in healthy human volunteers . Gut Microbes , 2 (4 ), 256 –261 . 10.4161/gmic.2.4.16108 
21983070 


Meyer , U. 
, & 
Feldon , J. 
 (2009 ). Prenatal exposure to infection: A primary mechanism for abnormal dopaminergic development in schizophrenia . Psychopharmacology (Berl) , 206 (4 ), 587 –602 . 10.1007/s00213-009-1504-9 
19277608 


Mika , A. 
, 
Van Treuren , W. 
, 
Gonzalez , A. 
, 
Herrera , J. J. 
, 
Knight , R. 
, & 
Fleshner , M. 
 (2015 ). Exercise is more effective at altering gut microbial composition and producing stable changes in lean mass in juvenile versus adult male f344 rats . PLoS ONE , 10 (5 ), e0125889
10.1371/journal.pone.0125889 
26016739 


Miller , A. H. 
, & 
Raison , C. L. 
 (2016 ). The role of inflammation in depression: From evolutionary imperative to modern treatment target . Nature Reviews Immunology , 16 (1 ), 22 –34 . 10.1038/nri.2015.5 



Mokhber , N. 
, 
Shaghayegh , H. 
, 
Talebi , M. 
, & 
Tavassoli , A. 
 (2016 ). Comparison of levels of depression in patients with excessive obesity before and after gastric bypass surgery . Journal of Minimally Invasive Surgical Sciences , 5 (4 ), e34947
10.17795/minsurgery-34947 



Moloney , R. D. 
, 
Desbonnet , L. 
, 
Clarke , G. 
, 
Dinan , T. G. 
, & 
Cryan , J. F. 
 (2014 ). The microbiome: Stress, health and disease . Mammalian Genome , 25 (1–2 ), 49 –74 . 10.1007/s00335-013-9488-5 
24281320 


Monda , V. 
, 
Villano , I. 
, 
Messina , A. 
, 
Valenzano , A. 
, 
Esposito , T. 
, 
Moscatelli , F. 
, … 
Messina , G. 
 (2017 ). Exercise modifies the gut microbiota with positive health effects . Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity , 2017 , 8 
10.1155/2017/3831972 



Moret , C. 
, & 
Briley , M. 
 (2011 ). The importance of norepinephrine in depression . Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment , 7 (Suppl 1 ), 9 –13 . 10.2147/NDT.S19619 
21750623 


Morrison , D. J. 
, & 
Preston , T. 
 (2016 ). Formation of short chain fatty acids by the gut microbiota and their impact on human metabolism . Gut Microbes , 7 (3 ), 189 –200 . 10.1080/19490976.2015.1134082 
26963409 


Mu , C. 
, 
Yang , Y. 
, & 
Zhu , W. 
 (2016 ). Gut microbiota: the brain peacekeeper . Frontiers in Microbiology , 7 , 345 
10.3389/fmicb.2016.00345 
27014255 


Mueller , N. T. 
, 
Bakacs , E. 
, 
Combellick , J. 
, 
Grigoryan , Z. 
, & 
Dominguez‐Bello , M. G. 
 (2015 ). The infant microbiome development: Mom matters . Trends in Molecular Medicine , 21 (2 ), 109 –117 . 10.1016/j.molmed.2014.12.002 
25578246 


Mulak , A. 
, & 
Bonaz , B. 
 (2015 ). Brain‐gut‐microbiota axis in Parkinson's disease . World Journal of Gastroenterology , 21 (37 ), 10609 –10620 . 10.3748/wjg.v21.i37.10609 
26457021 


Müller , C. P. 
, & 
Homberg , J. R. 
 (2015 ). The role of serotonin in drug use and addiction . Behavioral Brain Research , 277 , 146 –192 . 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.04.007 



Murphy , S. E. 
, 
Yiend , J. 
, 
Lester , K. J. 
, 
Cowen , P. J. 
, & 
Harmer , C. J. 
 (2009 ). Short‐term serotonergic but not noradrenergic antidepressant administration reduces attentional vigilance to threat in healthy volunteers . International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology , 12 (2 ), 169 –179 . 10.1017/S1461145708009164 
18752726 


Myles , I. A. 
 (2014 ). Fast food fever: Reviewing the impacts of the Western diet on immunity . Nutrition Journal , 13 , 61 
10.1186/1475-2891-13-61 
24939238 


Neufeld , K. M. 
, 
Kang , N. 
, 
Bienenstock , J. 
, & 
Foster , J. A. 
 (2011 ). Reduced anxiety‐like behavior and central neurochemical change in germ‐free mice . Neurogastroenterology and Motility , 23 (3 ), 255 –264 , e119. 10.1111/j.1365-2982.2010.01620.x 
21054680 


Niccoli , T. 
, & 
Partridge , L. 
 (2012 ). Ageing as a risk factor for disease . Current Biology , 22 (17 ), R741 –752 . 10.1016/j.cub.2012.07.024 
22975005 


Noakes , T. D. 
 (2012 ). Fatigue is a brain‐derived emotion that regulates the exercise behavior to ensure the protection of whole body homeostasis . Frontiers in Physiology , 3 , 82 
10.3389/fphys.2012.00082 
22514538 


Ochner , C. N. 
, 
Kwok , Y. 
, 
Conceição , E. 
, 
Pantazatos , S. P. 
, 
Puma , L. M. 
, 
Carnell , S. 
, … 
Geliebter , A. 
 (2011 ). Selective reduction in neural responses to high calorie foods following gastric bypass surgery . Annals of Surgery , 253 (3 ), 502 –507 . 10.1097/SLA.0b013e318203a289 
21169809 


Ochner , C. N. 
, 
Stice , E. 
, 
Hutchins , E. 
, 
Afifi , L. 
, 
Geliebter , A. 
, 
Hirsch , J. 
, & 
Teixeira , J. 
 (2012 ). Relation between changes in neural responsivity and reductions in desire to eat high‐calorie foods following gastric bypass surgery . Neuroscience , 209 , 128 –135 . 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.02.030 
22406414 

OECD 
(2017 ). Health at a glance 2017: OECD indicators . Paris, France : OECD Publishing .


O'Mahony , S. M. 
, 
Clarke , G. 
, 
Borre , Y. E. 
, 
Dinan , T. G. 
, & 
Cryan , J. F. 
 (2015 ). Serotonin, tryptophan metabolism and the brain‐gut‐microbiome axis . Behavioral Brain Research , 277 , 32 –48 . 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.027 



Oriach , C. S. 
, 
Robertson , R. C. 
, 
Stanton , C. 
, 
Cryan , J. F. 
, & 
Dinan , T. G. 
 (2016 ). Food for thought: The role of nutrition in the microbiota‐gut–brain axis . Clinical Nutrition Experimental , 6 , 25 –38 . 10.1016/j.yclnex.2016.01.003 



Ortiz , G. G. 
, 
Benítez‐King , G. A. 
, 
Rosales‐Corral , S. A. 
, 
Pacheco‐Moisés , F. P. 
, & 
Velázquez‐Brizuela , I. E. 
 (2008 ). Cellular and biochemical actions of melatonin which protect against free radicals: role in neurodegenerative disorders . Current Neuropharmacology , 6 (3 ), 203 –214 . 10.2174/157015908785777201 
19506721 


Palmeira , A. L. 
, 
Branco , T. L. 
, 
Martins , S. C. 
, 
Minderico , C. S. 
, 
Silva , M. N. 
, 
Vieira , P. N. 
, … 
Teixeira , P. J. 
 (2010 ). Change in body image and psychological well‐being during behavioral obesity treatment: Associations with weight loss and maintenance . Body Image , 7 (3 ), 187 –193 . 10.1016/j.bodyim.2010.03.002 
20409769 


Palsson , O. S. 
, & 
Whitehead , W. E. 
 (2013 ). Psychological treatments in functional gastrointestinal disorders: A primer for the gastroenterologist . Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology , 11 (3 ), 208 –216 ; quiz e222–203. 10.1016/j.cgh.2012.10.031 
23103907 


Patel , J. P. 
, & 
Frey , B. N. 
 (2015 ). Disruption in the blood‐brain barrier: The missing link between brain and body inflammation in bipolar disorder? 
Neural Plasticity , 2015 , 12 
10.1155/2015/708306 



Paulus , M. P. 
, & 
Stein , M. B. 
 (2010 ). Interoception in anxiety and depression . Brain Structure and Function , 214 (5–6 ), 451 –463 . 10.1007/s00429-010-0258-9 
20490545 


Peng , L. 
, 
Li , Z. R. 
, 
Green , R. S. 
, 
Holzman , I. R. 
, & 
Lin , J. 
 (2009 ). Butyrate enhances the intestinal barrier by facilitating tight junction assembly via activation of AMP‐activated protein kinase in Caco‐2 cell monolayers . Journal of Nutrition , 139 (9 ), 1619 –1625 . 10.3945/jn.109.104638 
19625695 


Polidano , C. 
, 
Zhu , A. 
, & 
Bornstein , J. C. 
 (2017 ). The relation between caesarean birth and child cognitive development . Scientific Reports , 7 (11483 ), 1 –10 . 10.1038/s41598-017-10831-y 
28127051 


Poti , J. M. 
, 
Mendez , M. A. 
, 
Ng , S. W. 
, & 
Popkin , B. M. 
 (2015 ). Is the degree of food processing and convenience linked with the nutritional quality of foods purchased by US households? 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition , 101 (6 ), 1251 –1262 . 10.3945/ajcn.114.100925 
25948666 


Quercia , S. 
, 
Candela , M. 
, 
Giuliani , C. 
, 
Turroni , S. 
, 
Luiselli , D. 
, 
Rampelli , S. 
, … 
Pirazzini , C. 
 (2014 ). From lifetime to evolution: Timescales of human gut microbiota adaptation . Frontiers in Microbiology , 5 , 1 –9 . 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00587 
24478763 


Rao , A. V. 
, 
Bested , A. C. 
, 
Beaulne , T. M. 
, 
Katzman , M. A. 
, 
Iorio , C. 
, 
Berardi , J. M. 
, & 
Logan , A. C. 
 (2009 ). A randomized, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled pilot study of a probiotic in emotional symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome . Gut Pathogens , 1 (1 ), 6 
10.1186/1757-4749-1-6 
19338686 


Rea , K. 
, 
Dinan , T. G. 
, & 
Cryan , J. F. 
 (2016 ). The microbiome: A key regulator of stress and neuroinflammation . Neurobiol Stress , 4 , 23 –33 . 10.1016/j.ynstr.2016.03.001 
27981187 


Rhee , S. H. 
, 
Pothoulakis , C. 
, & 
Mayer , E. A. 
 (2009 ). Principles and clinical implications of the brain‐gut‐enteric microbiota axis . Nature Reviews Gastroenterology & Hepatology , 6 (5 ), 306 –314 . 10.1038/nrgastro.2009.35 
19404271 


Rogers , G. B. 
, 
Keating , D. J. 
, 
Young , R. L. 
, 
Wong , M. L. 
, 
Licinio , J. 
, & 
Wesselingh , S. 
 (2016 ). From gut dysbiosis to altered brain function and mental illness: Mechanisms and pathways . Molecular Psychiatry , 21 (6 ), 738 –748 . 10.1038/mp.2016.50 
27090305 


Roohafza , H. 
, 
Bidaki , E. Z. 
, 
Hasanzadeh‐Keshteli , A. 
, 
Daghaghzade , H. 
, 
Afshar , H. 
, & 
Adibi , P. 
 (2016 ). Anxiety, depression and distress among irritable bowel syndrome and their subtypes: An epidemiological population based study . Advanced Biomedical Research , 5 , 183 
10.4103/2277-9175.190938 
28028523 


Rubio‐Ruiz , M. E. 
, 
Peredo‐Escárcega , A. E. 
, 
Cano‐Martínez , A. 
, & 
Guarner‐Lans , V. 
 (2015 ). An evolutionary perspective of nutrition and inflammation as mechanisms of cardiovascular disease . International Journal of Evolutionary Biology , 2015 , 1 –10 . 10.1155/2015/179791 



Sampson , T. R. 
, & 
Mazmanian , S. K. 
 (2015 ). Control of brain development, function, and behavior by the microbiome . Cell Host & Microbe , 17 (5 ), 565 –576 . 10.1016/j.chom.2015.04.011 
25974299 


Sarwer , D. B. 
, & 
Steffen , K. J. 
 (2015 ). Quality of life, body image and sexual functioning in bariatric surgery patients . European Eating Disorders Review , 23 (6 ), 504 –508 . 10.1002/erv.2412 
26608946 


Scheperjans , F. 
, 
Aho , V. 
, 
Pereira , P. A. B. 
, 
Koskinen , K. 
, 
Paulin , L. 
, 
Pekkonen , E. 
, … 
Auvinen , P. 
 (2015 ). Gut microbiota are related to Parkinson's disease and clinical phenotype . Movement Disorders , 30 (3 ), 350 –358 . 10.1002/mds.26069 
25476529 


Schmidt , K. 
, 
Cowen , P. J. 
, 
Harmer , C. J. 
, 
Tzortzis , G. 
, 
Errington , S. 
, & 
Burnet , P. W. 
 (2015 ). Prebiotic intake reduces the waking cortisol response and alters emotional bias in healthy volunteers . Psychopharmacology (Berl) , 232 (10 ), 1793 –1801 . 10.1007/s00213-014-3810-0 
25449699 


Schnorr , S. L. 
, 
Sankaranarayanan , K. 
, 
Lewis , C. M. 
Jr
, & 
Warinner , C. 
 (2016 ). Insights into human evolution from ancient and contemporary microbiome studies . Current Opinion in Genetics & Development , 41 , 14 –26 . 10.1016/j.gde.2016.07.003 
27507098 


Schoknecht , K. 
, & 
Shalev , H. 
 (2012 ). Blood‐brain barrier dysfunction in brain diseases: Clinical experience . Epilepsia , 53 (Suppl 6 ), 7 –13 . 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03697.x 



Sekirov , I. 
, 
Russell , S. L. 
, 
Antunes , L. C. 
, & 
Finlay , B. B. 
 (2010 ). Gut microbiota in health and disease . Physiological Reviews , 90 (3 ), 859 –904 . 10.1152/physrev.00045.2009 
20664075 


Sender , R. 
, 
Fuchs , S. 
, & 
Milo , R. 
 (2016 ). Revised estimates for the number of human and bacteria cells in the body . PLoS Biology , 14 (8 ), e1002533
10.1371/journal.pbio.1002533 
27541692 


Sevelsted , A. 
, 
Stokholm , J. 
, 
Bonnelykke , K. 
, & 
Bisgaard , H. 
 (2015 ). Cesarean section and chronic immune disorders . Pediatrics , 135 (1 ), e92 –e98 . 10.1542/peds.2014-0596 
25452656 


Shahar , D. 
, 
Shai , I. 
, 
Vardi , H. 
, 
Shahar , A. 
, & 
Fraser , D. 
 (2005 ). Diet and eating habits in high and low socioeconomic groups . Nutrition , 21 (5 ), 559 –566 . 10.1016/j.nut.2004.09.018 
15850961 


Sheedy , J. R. 
, 
Wettenhall , R. E. 
, 
Scanlon , D. 
, 
Gooley , P. R. 
, 
Lewis , D. P. 
, 
McGregor , N. 
, … 
De Meirleir , K. L. 
 (2009 ). Increased d‐lactic acid intestinal bacteria in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome . In Vivo , 23 (4 ), 621 –628 .19567398 


Sheflin , A. 
, 
Melby , C. L. 
, 
Carbonero , F. 
, & 
Weir , T. L. 
 (2017 ). Linking dietary patterns with gut microbial composition and function . Gut Microbes , 8 (2 ), 113 –129 . 10.1080/19490976.2016.1270809 
27960648 


Shi , Y. 
, 
Dong , Y. 
, 
Huang , W. 
, 
Zhu , D. 
, 
Mao , H. 
, & 
Su , P. 
 (2016 ). Fecal microbiota transplantation for ulcerative colitis: A systematic review and meta‐analysis . PLoS ONE , 11 (6 ), e0157259
10.1371/journal.pone.0157259 
27295210 


Shishov , V. A. 
, 
Kirovskaya , T. A. 
, 
Kudrin , V. S. 
, & 
Oleskin , A. V. 
 (2009 ). Amine neuromediators, their precursors, and oxidation products in the culture of Escherichia coli K‐12 . Applied Biochemistry and Microbiology , 45 (5 ), 494 –497 . 10.1134/S0003683809050068 



Singh , A. R. 
 (2010 ). Modern medicine: Towards prevention, cure, well‐being and longevity . Mens Sana Monographs , 8 (1 ), 17 –29 . 10.4103/0973-1229.58817 
21327168 


Singh , R. K. 
, 
Chang , H.‐W. 
, 
Yan , D. I. 
, 
Lee , K. M. 
, 
Ucmak , D. 
, 
Wong , K. 
, … 
Liao , W. 
 (2017 ). Influence of diet on the gut microbiome and implications for human health . Journal of Translational Medicine , 15 (1 ), 73 
10.1186/s12967-017-1175-y 
28388917 


Sirin , S. R. 
 (2005 ). Socioeconomic status and academic achievement: a meta‐analytic review of research . Review of Educational Research , 75 (3 ), 417 –453 . 10.3102/00346543075003417 



Smith , P. M. 
, 
Howitt , M. R. 
, 
Panikov , N. 
, 
Michaud , M. 
, 
Gallini , C. A. 
, 
Bohlooly‐Y , M. 
, … 
Garrett , W. S. 
 (2013 ). The microbial metabolites, short‐chain fatty acids, regulate colonic Treg cell homeostasis . Science , 341 (6145 ), 569 –573 . 10.1126/science.1241165 
23828891 


Song , P. 
, 
Patel , N. B. 
, 
Gunther , S. 
, 
Li , C.‐S. 
, 
Liu , Y. 
, 
Lee , C. Y. G. 
, … 
Wong , M. S. 
 (2016 ). Body image and quality of life: changes with gastric bypass and body contouring . Annals of Plastic Surgery , 76 (Suppl 3 ), S216 –S221 . 10.1097/SAP.0000000000000788 
27070678 


Song , S. J. 
, 
Lauber , C. 
, 
Costello , E. K. 
, 
Lozupone , C. A. 
, 
Humphrey , G. 
, 
Berg‐Lyons , D. 
, … 
Knight , R. 
 (2013 ). Cohabiting family members share microbiota with one another and with their dogs . eLife , 2 , e00458
10.7554/eLife.00458 .23599893 


Srivastava , K. 
, & 
Das , R. C. 
 (2015 ). Personality and health: Road to well‐being . Industrial Psychiatry Journal , 24 (1 ), 1 –4 . 10.4103/0972-6748.160905 
26257475 


Stanislawski , M. A. 
, 
Dabelea , D. 
, 
Wagner , B. D. 
, 
Sontag , M. K. 
, 
Lozupone , C. A. 
, & 
Eggesbø , M. 
 (2017 ). Pre‐pregnancy weight, gestational weight gain, and the gut microbiota of mothers and their infants . Microbiome , 5 (1 ), 113 
10.1186/s40168-017-0332-0 
28870230 


Stasi , C. 
, 
Rosselli , M. 
, 
Zignego , A. L. 
, 
Laffi , G. 
, & 
Milani , S. 
 (2014 ). Serotonin and its implication in the side‐effects of interferon‐based treatment of patients with chronic viral hepatitis: Pharmacological interventions . Hepatology Research , 44 (1 ), 9 –16 . 10.1111/hepr.12116 
23607322 


Steenbergen , L. 
, 
Sellaro , R. 
, 
van Hemert , S. 
, 
Bosch , J. A. 
, & 
Colzato , L. S. 
 (2015 ). A randomized controlled trial to test the effect of multispecies probiotics on cognitive reactivity to sad mood . Brain, Behavior, and Immunity , 48 , 258 –264 . 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.04.003 



Sudo , N. 
 (2012 ). Role of microbiome in regulating the HPA axis and its relevance to allergy . Chemical Immunology and Allergy , 98 , 163 –175 . 10.1159/000336510 
22767063 


Sudo , N. 
, 
Chida , Y. 
, 
Aiba , Y. 
, 
Sonoda , J. 
, 
Oyama , N. 
, 
Yu , X.‐N. 
, … 
Koga , Y. 
 (2004 ). Postnatal microbial colonization programs the hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal system for stress response in mice . Journal of Physiology , 558 (Pt 1 ), 263 –275 . 10.1113/jphysiol.2004.063388 
15133062 


Sun , J. 
, 
Wang , F. 
, 
Li , H. 
, 
Zhang , H. 
, 
Jin , J. 
, 
Chen , W. 
, … 
Liu , C. 
 (2015 ). Neuroprotective effect of sodium butyrate against cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice . BioMed Research International , 2015 , 395895
10.1155/2015/395895 
26064905 


Tamburini , S. 
, 
Shen , N. 
, 
Wu , H. C. 
, & 
Clemente , J. C. 
 (2016 ). The microbiome in early life: Implications for health outcomes . Nature Medicine , 22 (7 ), 713 –722 . 10.1038/nm.4142 



Tana , C. 
, 
Umesaki , Y. 
, 
Imaoka , A. 
, 
Handa , T. 
, 
Kanazawa , M. 
, & 
Fukudo , S. 
 (2010 ). Altered profiles of intestinal microbiota and organic acids may be the origin of symptoms in irritable bowel syndrome . Neurogastroenterology and Motility , 22 (5 ), 512 –519 , e114–515. 10.1111/j.1365-2982.2009.01427.x 
19903265 


Theis , K. R. 
, 
Dheilly , N. M. 
, 
Klassen , J. L. 
, 
Brucker , R. M. 
, 
Baines , J. F. 
, 
Bosch , T. C. G. 
, … 
Bordenstein , S. R. 
 (2016 ). Getting the hologenome concept right: An eco‐evolutionary framework for hosts and their microbiomes . mSystems , 1 (2 ), e00028‐1610.1128/mSystems.00028-16 



Tillisch , K. 
, 
Labus , J. 
, 
Kilpatrick , L. 
, 
Jiang , Z. 
, 
Stains , J. 
, 
Ebrat , B. 
, … 
Mayer , E. A. 
 (2013 ). Consumption of fermented milk product with probiotic modulates brain activity . Gastroenterology , 144 (7 ), 1394 –1401 , 1401.e1391–1394. 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.02.043 
23474283 


Ussar , S. 
, 
Fujisaka , S. 
, & 
Kahn , C. R. 
 (2016 ). Interactions between host genetics and gut microbiome in diabetes and metabolic syndrome . Molecular Metabolism , 5 (9 ), 795 –803 . 10.1016/j.molmet.2016.07.004 
27617202 


Uyeda , J. C. 
, 
Hansen , T. F. 
, 
Arnold , S. J. 
, & 
Pienaar , J. 
 (2011 ). The million‐year wait for macroevolutionary bursts . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA , 108 (38 ), 15908 –15913 . 10.1073/pnas.1014503108 



Van Oudenhove , L. 
, 
Crowell , M. D. 
, 
Drossman , D. A. 
, 
Halpert , A. D. 
, 
Keefer , L. 
, 
Lackner , J. M. 
, … 
Levy , R. L. 
 (2016 ). Biopsychosocial aspects of functional gastrointestinal disorders . Gastroenterology , 150 (6 ), 1355 –1367 . 10.1053/j.gastro.2016.02.027 



Vangay , P. 
, 
Ward , T. 
, 
Gerber , J. S. 
, & 
Knights , D. 
 (2015 ). Antibiotics, pediatric dysbiosis, and disease . Cell Host & Microbe , 17 (5 ), 553 –564 . 10.1016/j.chom.2015.04.006 
25974298 


Veatch , O. J. 
, 
Goldman , S. E. 
, 
Adkins , K. W. 
, & 
Malow , B. A. 
 (2015 ). Melatonin in children with autism spectrum disorders: How does the evidence fit together? 
Journal of Nature and Science , 1 (7 ), e125.


Voreades , N. 
, 
Kozil , A. 
, & 
Weir , T. L. 
 (2014 ). Diet and the development of the human intestinal microbiome . Frontiers in Microbiology , 5 (494 ), 1 –9 . 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00494 
24478763 


Vozeh , S. 
 (2003 ). Is the increasing use of evidence‐based pharmacotherapy causing the renaissance of complementary medicine? 
British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology , 56 (3 ), 292 –296 . 10.1046/j.0306-5251.2003.01879.x 
12919177 


Wallis , A. 
, 
Butt , H. 
, 
Ball , M. 
, 
Lewis , D. P. 
, & 
Bruck , D. 
 (2016 ). Support for the microgenderome: Associations in a human clinical population . Scientific Reports , 6 , 1 –9 . 10.1038/srep19171 
28442746 


Warren , R. P. 
, & 
Singh , V. K. 
 (1996 ). Elevated serotonin levels in autism: Association with the major histocompatibility complex . Neuropsychobiology , 34 (2 ), 72 –75 . 10.1159/000119295 
8904735 


Welly , R. J. 
, 
Liu , T.‐W. 
, 
Zidon , T. M. 
, 
Rowles , J. L. 
, 
Park , Y.‐M. 
, 
Smith , T. N. 
, … 
Vieira‐Potter , V. J. 
 (2016 ). Comparison of diet vs. exercise on metabolic function & gut microbiota in obese rats . Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise , 48 (9 ), 1688 –1698 . 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000964 
27128671 


Whitaker‐Azmitia , P. M. 
 (2001 ). Serotonin and brain development: Role in human developmental diseases . Brain Research Bulletin , 56 (5 ), 479 –485 . 10.1016/S0361-9230(01)00615-3 
11750793 


Wong , R. K. 
, 
Yang , C. 
, 
Song , G.‐H. 
, 
Wong , J. 
, & 
Ho , K.‐Y. 
 (2015 ). Melatonin regulation as a possible mechanism for probiotic (VSL#3) in irritable bowel syndrome: a randomized double‐blinded placebo study . Digestive Diseases and Sciences , 60 (1 ), 186 –194 . 10.1007/s10620-014-3299-8 
25092036 

World Health Organisation (WHO) 
(2017 ). Depression (Fact sheet No. 369) . Retrieved from http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs369/en/



Wu , G. D. 
, 
Chen , J. 
, 
Hoffmann , C. 
, 
Bittinger , K. 
, 
Chen , Y.‐Y. 
, 
Keilbaugh , S. A. 
, … 
Lewis , J. D. 
 (2011 ). Linking long‐term dietary patterns with gut microbial enterotypes . Science , 334 (6052 ), 105 –108 . 10.1126/science.1208344 
21885731 


Yamamoto , K. 
, & 
Hornykiewicz , O. 
 (2004 ). Proposal for a noradrenaline hypothesis of schizophrenia . Progress in Neuro‐Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry , 28 (5 ), 913 –922 . 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2004.05.033 
15363614 


Yamamura , S. 
, 
Morishima , H. 
, 
Kumano‐go , T. 
, 
Suganuma , N. 
, 
Matsumoto , H. 
, 
Adachi , H. 
, … 
Takeda , M. 
 (2009 ). The effect of Lactobacillus helveticus fermented milk on sleep and health perception in elderly subjects . European Journal of Clinical Nutrition , 63 (1 ), 100 –105 . 10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602898 
17851460 


Yarandi , S. S. 
, 
Peterson , D. A. 
, 
Treisman , G. J. 
, 
Moran , T. H. 
, & 
Pasricha , P. J. 
 (2016 ). Modulatory effects of gut microbiota on the central nervous system: How gut could play a role in neuropsychiatric health and diseases . Journal of Neurogastroenterology and Motility , 22 (2 ), 201 –212 . 10.5056/jnm15146 
27032544 


Yatsunenko , T. 
, 
Rey , F. E. 
, 
Manary , M. J. 
, 
Trehan , I. 
, 
Dominguez‐Bello , M. G. 
, 
Contreras , M. 
, … 
Gordon , J. I. 
 (2012 ). Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography . Nature , 486 (7402 ), 222 –227 . 10.1038/nature11053 
22699611 


Yoto , A. 
, 
Murao , S. 
, 
Motoki , M. 
, 
Yokoyama , Y. 
, 
Horie , N. 
, 
Takeshima , K. 
, … 
Yokogoshi , H. 
 (2012 ). Oral intake of gamma‐aminobutyric acid affects mood and activities of central nervous system during stressed condition induced by mental tasks . Amino Acids , 43 (3 ), 1331 –1337 . 10.1007/s00726-011-1206-6 
22203366 


Zagajewski , J. 
, 
Drozdowicz , D. 
, 
Brzozowska , I. 
, 
Hubalewska‐Mazgaj , M. 
, 
Stelmaszynska , T. 
, 
Laidler , P. M. 
, & 
Brzozowski , T. 
 (2012 ). Conversion L‐tryptophan to melatonin in the gastrointestinal tract: The new high performance liquid chromatography method enabling simultaneous determination of six metabolites of L‐tryptophan by native fluorescence and UV‐VIS detection . Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology , 63 (6 ), 613 –621 .23388477 


Zhang , H. 
, 
DiBaise , J. K. 
, 
Zuccolo , A. 
, 
Kudrna , D. 
, 
Braidotti , M. 
, 
Yu , Y. 
, … 
Krajmalnik‐Brown , R. 
 (2009 ). Human gut microbiota in obesity and after gastric bypass . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA , 106 (7 ), 2365 –2370 . 10.1073/pnas.0812600106

