
==== Front
Toxicol Appl PharmacolToxicol. Appl. PharmacolToxicology and Applied Pharmacology0041-008X1096-0333Academic Press S0041-008X(18)30070-X10.1016/j.taap.2018.02.024ArticleDevelopment of the Adverse Outcome Pathway (AOP): Chronic binding of antagonist to N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) during brain development induces impairment of learning and memory abilities of children Sachana Magdalini 1Rolaki Alexandra Bal-Price Anna anna.price@ec.europa.eu⁎European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Italy⁎ Corresponding author at: European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Directorate F – Health, Consumers and Reference Materials, Unit F3: Chemicals Safety and Alternative Methods, Via E. Fermi, 2749. TP126, I-21027 Ispra, (VA), Italy. anna.price@ec.europa.eu1 Current position: Environment Health and Safety Division, Environment Directorate, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2 rue André Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16, France.

01 9 2018 01 9 2018 354 153 175 4 12 2017 26 2 2018 28 2 2018 © 2018 The Authors2018This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).The Adverse Outcome Pathways (AOPs) are designed to provide mechanistic understanding of complex biological systems and pathways of toxicity that result in adverse outcomes (AOs) relevant to regulatory endpoints. AOP concept captures in a structured way the causal relationships resulting from initial chemical interaction with biological target(s) (molecular initiating event) to an AO manifested in individual organisms and/or populations through a sequential series of key events (KEs), which are cellular, anatomical and/or functional changes in biological processes. An AOP provides the mechanistic detail required to support chemical safety assessment, the development of alternative methods and the implementation of an integrated testing strategy.

An example of the AOP relevant to developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) is described here following the requirements of information defined by the OECD Users' Handbook Supplement to the Guidance Document for developing and assessing AOPs. In this AOP, the binding of an antagonist to glutamate receptor N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDAR) receptor is defined as MIE. This MIE triggers a cascade of cellular KEs including reduction of intracellular calcium levels, reduction of brain derived neurotrophic factor release, neuronal cell death, decreased glutamate presynaptic release and aberrant dendritic morphology. At organ level, the above mentioned KEs lead to decreased synaptogenesis and decreased neuronal network formation and function causing learning and memory deficit at organism level, which is defined as the AO. There are in vitro, in vivo and epidemiological data that support the described KEs and their causative relationships rendering this AOP relevant to DNT evaluation in the context of regulatory purposes.

Highlights
• Inhibition of NMDA receptors function could result in learning and memory impairment

• Environmental chemicals are linked to learning and memory damage of children

• AOP concept guide development of DNT in vitro testing strategy

• Alternative approaches could support DNT regulatory testing



Keywords
Adverse Outcome PathwayRegulatory ToxicologyDevelopmental Neurotoxicity
==== Body
1 Introduction
To support a paradigm shift in regulatory toxicology testing and risk assessment by moving away from apical animal testing towards mechanistic knowledge based evaluation, the Adverse Outcome Pathway (AOP) concept has been proposed. AOP has been developed as a framework to facilitate a knowledge-based safety assessment that relies on understanding mechanisms of toxicity, rather than simply observing its AO. This framework helps to organize the existing information and data across multiple levels of biological organisation and identify correlative and causal linkages between the molecular initiating event (MIE) and the key events (KEs) at molecular, cellular, tissue, organism or population level, that when sufficiently perturbed by chemical exposures, result in AOs (Ankley et al., 2010; OECD, 2017). Therefore, the AOP framework provides means to adapt mechanistic understanding for regulatory decision making by consolidating, managing and exchanging knowledge between the research and regulatory communities (Delrue et al., 2016; Vinken et al., 2017).

A variety of molecular and cellular processes is known to be crucial to proper development and function of the central nervous systems (CNS). However, there are relatively few examples of well-documented pathways with comprehensive understanding of causally linked MIEs and KEs that result in AOs in the developing brain. The functional and structural complexity of the CNS, coupled with the dynamics of brain development, suggests that a broad array of MIEs may trigger the same adverse neurological outcome and on contrary the various AOs can be caused by the same MIEs. This complexity of brain development, including different susceptibility to toxicity induced by the same chemical at different developmental windows creates a real challenge for AOP development relevant to DNT evaluation (Bal-Price et al., 2015b). Currently, in the DNT field, there are only a few DNT AOPs developed. Here, we describe the AOP developed for impairment of learning and memory processes in children (AO) caused by inhibition of glutamate receptor N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDAR) function when it takes place during synaptogenesis. It is well documented in the existing literature that cognitive processes rely on physiological functioning of the NMDAR (reviewed in Rezvani, 2006; Hansen et al., 2017). In this AOP, binding of an antagonist to NMDAR was defined as MIE that causes inhibition of NMDAR function leading to reduced intracellular level of calcium, followed by reduced levels of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), reduced presynaptic glutamate release, aberrant dendritic morphology, increased cell death, decreased synaptogenesis and neuronal network formation and function resulting in impairment of learning and memory in children that was defined as adverse outcome (AO) (Fig. 1).Fig. 1 Graphical representation of the AOP. Key events at the cellular, organ and organism level triggered by binding of an antagonist to the NMDA receptor (Molecular Initiating Event) and resulting in the adverse outcome (AO), defined as impairment of learning and memory.

Fig. 1

Damage or destruction of neurons by chemical compounds during development when they are in the process of synapses formation, integration and formation of neuronal networks will derange the organisation and function of these networks, thereby setting the stage for subsequent impairment of learning and memory. Indeed, learning-related processes require neuronal networks to detect correlations between events in the environment and store these as changes in synaptic strength (Abbott and Nelson, 2000). Long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) are two fundamental processes involved in cognitive functions (Abbott and Nelson, 2000; Malenka and Bear, 2004), which respectively, strengthen synaptic inputs that are effective at depolarizing the postsynaptic neuron and weaken synaptic inputs, thus reinforcing activation of useful pathways in the brain. A series of important findings suggest that the biochemical changes that happen after induction of LTP also occur during memory acquisition, showing temporality between the two KEs (reviewed in Lynch, 2004). Empirical support for the Key Event Relationships (KERs) of this AOP is based mainly on data published after exposure to lead (Pb2+) referring to in vitro, in vivo and epidemiological studies. It is well known and documented that Pb2+ is a potential inhibitor of the NMDA receptor that plays an important role in brain development and cognition. Chronic Pb2+ exposure inhibits NMDA receptor function, followed by a described cascade of KEs at the cellular and tissue level, causing impairments of nerve communication in the brain responsible for deficit in synaptic plasticity, and finally resulting in learning and memory impartment (Toscano and Guilarte, 2005). There is evidence supporting a link between exposure to Pb2+ and learning and memory impairment coming not only from experimental data (in vivo or in vitro) but also from cohorts, epidemiological studies discussed in the last KER of the present AOP.

This AOP is the first one relevant to DNT evaluation, developed according to the guidance document on developing and assessing AOPs (OECD, 2017) including its supplement, the Users' Hand book (OECD, 2016a) and submitted to the AOP-Wiki (https://aopwiki.org/aops/13), an AOP repository within the OECD programme on AOP Development and Assessment. The present concise version presents data in tabular format and includes recently published bibliography. Furthermore, the sections dealing with the weight of evidence (WoE) evaluation of KEs, KERs and overall AOP have been extensively revised as the way to assemble and assess the degree of confidence that supports AOPs has evolved and significantly as more experience has been gained in this field.

2 Structure and major principles of AOP development
As mentioned above the AOP concept describes a sequence of measurable KEs that are correlatively or causally linked (Fig. 1), originating from a MIE in which a chemical interacts with a biological target (OECD, 2016a), triggering the first KE downstream. The initiated by the MIE sequential series of KEs includes molecular, cellular, anatomical and/or functional changes in biological systems and ultimately results in a KE at tissue level leading to an AO of regulatory relevance for human health or eco-toxicological risk assessment.

Understanding physiological pathways is the basis for describing the perturbations that occur following chemical exposure. The observed changes of biological state that should be measurable at different levels of biological organisation (cellular, tissue, organ or organism) as well as its general role in biology should be covered in the description of KEs (including specialised KEs such as MIE and AO). KERs should assemble and organise evidence that would facilitate establishment of the scientific basis permitting extrapolation of the state of the KE downstream from the measured KE upstream.

By definition AOPs are not chemical specific and the described KEs should be independent from any specific chemical initiator (Villeneuve et al., 2014). However, an empirical support for KER description refers to the experimental data derived from exposure to chemicals to be able to illustrate understanding of the patters of biological responses between identified KEs based on reviewed literature. It is important that there are studies available where the compounds have been clinically proven to trigger the identified AO, supporting the developed AOP. For example, in the present AOP the empirical support for KERs is mainly based on experimental data obtained after exposure to Pb2+ as reference chemical since there are abundant in vivo, in vitro and epidemiological studies suggesting that cognitive deficit in children is linked to chronic exposure to this heavy metal. However, any chemical that will bind and block NMDA receptor function, triggering the described cascade of KEs during synaptogenesis will be relevant to this AOP according to the rule that AOPs should be chemically agnostic.

In principle, AOPs are defined as linear, non-branching sequences of KEs, linking MIE to AO (Fig. 2) despite of the complex feed-back loops, defense mechanisms, modifying factor that contribute to the interactions between KEs. These can be described in the text of KERs.Fig. 2 A schematic representation of the Adverse Outcome Pathway (AOP) framework. An AOP is triggered by a Molecular Initiating Event (MIE), an initial interaction with a biological target (Anchor 1) that leads to a sequential cascade of cellular, tissue and organ responses (Key Events), linked to each other by key event relationship (KER) to result in an adverse outcome (AO) of regulatory relevance.

Fig. 2

However, for this AOP was justified to present three KEs (neuronal cell death, decreased presynaptic release of glutamate and aberrant dendritic morphology), causally linked to the MIE and AO, happening simultaneously since they are acting together leading the downstream KE (decreased synaptogenesis). This representation is more practical both for the development and use of the AOP than breaking those multiple highly related pathways into separate AOPs.

The whole AOP is evaluated by weight of evidence (WoE), applying modified Bradford-Hill considerations referring to the biological plausibility of KERs, essentiality of KEs and empirical support for KERs (Becker et al., 2015; Bal-Price et al., 2017). Biological plausibility of KERs describes how well the mechanistic relationship between KE upstream and KE downstream is understood with respect to current knowledge. Essentiality should refer to experimental support proving evidence that blockage of any KE upstream will prevent KEs downstream or the AO. Empirical support for KER should assess concordance of the doses and time at which the upstream and downstream KEs are observed, and incidence concordance. The overall assessment of the level of confidence in the developed AOP is based on the essentiality experimental data for each KE, the biological plausibility and the empirical support for KERs (see Section 4).

3 Description of the identified key event relationships (KERs)
3.1 KER: binding of antagonist to NMDA receptors (MIE) leads to Inhibition of NMDARs function
3.1.1 KE upstream: binding of antagonist to NMDARs
Due to its physiological and pharmacological properties, glutamate (Glu) activates three classes of ionotropic receptors named: α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoazolepropionic acid (AMPARs), 2-carboxy-3-carboxymethyl-4-isopropenylpyrrolidine (kainate receptors, KARs) and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA receptors, NMDARs). NMDA receptor, is composed of two NR1 subunits that are combined with either two NR2 (NR2A, NR2B, NR2C NR2D) subunits and less commonly are assembled together with a combination of NR2 and NR3 (NR3A, NR3B) subunits (reviewed in Traynelis et al., 2010; Hansen et al., 2017). To be activated NMDA receptors require simultaneous binding of both Glu to NR2 subunits and of glycine to either NR1 or NR3 subunits that provide the specific binding sites named extracellular ligand-binding domains (LBDs). NMDAR can also be activated indirectly through initial activation of KA/AMPARs. Binding of agonist to KA/AMPARs results in ion influx (mainly of Na+ and to a small extend of K+) and glutamate release from excitatory synaptic vesicles causing depolarization of the postsynaptic neuron (Dingledine et al., 1999). Upon this depolarization the Mg2+ block is removed, allowing sodium, potassium, and importantly calcium ions to enter into a cell. At positive potentials, NMDARs then show maximal permeability (i.e., large outward currents can be observed under these circumstances). Due to the time needed for the Mg2+ removal, NMDARs activate more slowly, having a peak conductance long after the KA/AMPAR peak conductance takes place. It is important to note that NMDARs conduct currents only when Mg2+ block is relieved, glutamate and glycine is bound, and the postsynaptic neuron is depolarized.

In hippocampus (critical brain region form cognitive functions), NR2A and NR2B are the most abundant NR2 family subunits. NR2A-containing NMDARs are mostly expressed synaptically, while NR2B-containing NMDARs are found both synaptically and extrasynaptically (Tovar and Westbrook, 1999).

3.1.2 KE downstream: inhibition of NMDARs function
NMDA receptors, when compared to the other Glu receptors, are characterised by higher affinity for Glu, slower activation and desensitisation kinetics and higher permeability for calcium (Ca2+) and susceptibility to potential-dependent blockage by magnesium ions (Mg2+). They are involved in fast excitatory synaptic transmission and neuronal plasticity in the CNS. Ca2+ flux through the NMDA receptor is considered to play a critical role in pre- and post-synaptic plasticity, a cellular mechanism important for learning and memory (Barria and Malinow, 2002). The NMDA receptors have been shown also to play an essential role in the strengthening of synapses and neuronal differentiation, through long-term potentiation (LTP), and the weakening of synapses, through LTD. All these processes are important units implicated in the memory and learning processes (Barria and Malinow, 2002).

3.1.3 Weight of evidence (WoE) evaluation
3.1.3.1 Biological plausibility for this KER
The weight of evidence for this KER is rated as strong (Fig. 3A). There is structural and mechanistic understanding supporting the relationship between the MIE (binding of antagonists to NMDARs) and the KE down (inhibition of NMDARs function). Crystal structure studies were applied to study the binding of antagonists/agonists to NMDA receptors (Traynelis et al., 2010; Hansen et al., 2017). Binding of antagonists to NMDARs, causes LBD conformation changes, which promote channel closure leading to reduced (or blockage) of Ca+2 influx. The decreased (or lack) of Ca+2 ions influx can be measured and is considered as a readout of decreased (or blocked) NMDAR function (Blanke and VanDongen, 2009).Fig. 3 A qualitative assessments of Key Event Relationships (KERs) in the AOP triggered by binding of an antagonist to N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) (molecular initiating event: MIE) resulting in an impairment of learning and memory (adverse outcome: AO) referring to biological plausibility, empirical support and uncertainties. (A) KER 1, antagonist binding to NMDARs results in the inhibition of NMDA receptor function; (B) KER 2, the inhibition of NMDA leads to decreased calcium influx; (C) KER 3, decreased calcium influx causes reduced release of BDNF; (D) KER 4a, reduced release of BDNF results in aberrant dendritic morphology; (E) KER 4b, reduced release of BDNF leads to reduced presynaptic release of glutamate; (F) KER 4c, reduced release of BDNF causes neuronal cell death; (G). KER 5a, aberrant dendritic morphology results in decreased synaptogenesis; (H) KER 5b, reduced presynaptic release of glutamate leads to decreased synaptogenesis; (I) KER 5c, neuronal cell death leads to decreased synaptogenesis; (J) KER 6, decreased synaptogenesis results in decreased neuronal network function; (K) KER 7, decreased neuronal network function leads to impairment of learning and memory (AO).

Fig. 3

3.1.3.2 Empirical support for linkage
It is well understood and documented that Pb2+ has potent concentration-dependent inhibitory effects on the NMDA receptors function (Guilarte and Miceli, 1992; Guilarte, 1997a, Guilarte, 1997b; Gavazzo et al., 2001). These inhibitory effects of Pb2+ on NMDA receptors activation appear to be age and brain region specific (Guilarte, 1997b; Guilarte and Miceli, 1992). For Pb2+ the half maximal inhibition concentrations (IC50) is significantly lower in cortical membranes prepared from neonatal than from adult rats (Guilarte and Miceli, 1992). As regards the brain regions, hippocampus is more sensitive than the cerebral cortex since the IC50 for Pb2+is significantly lower in hippocampus (Guilarte and Miceli, 1992). During synaptogenesis the hippocampus appears to be particularly vulnerable to Pb2+ exposure as in this brain structure NMDA receptors undergo subunit specific changes during development. (Guilarte and McGlothan, 1998). Pb2+decreases the expression of hippocampal NR2A-subunit of NMDARs at synapses and increases targeting of NR2B-NMDARs to dendritic spines (without increased NR2B-NMDARs expression), resulting in decreased protein synthesis in dendrites that are important for learning and memory processes (Neal et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2002).

To predict how potent an antagonist can be, the IC50 and the half maximal effective concentration (EC50) of glutamate/glycine-induced currents in NMDA receptors was measured from brain slices and cells or in recombinantly expressed receptors. Traynelis et al. (2010) summarised the IC50 values for competitive, non-competitive and uncompetitive antagonists in different subunits of NMDA receptors. Also quantitative evaluation of Zn2+ binding to the NR2 subunits have been determined (Gavazzo et al., 2008).

It is worth noting that in contrast to chronic exposure and persistent antagonism of the NMDA receptor for a period of days, acute inhibition of NMDAR function may trigger different downstream KEs, such as up-regulation of the NMDARs, resulting in an increased influx of calcium and neuronal cell death (Ikonomidou et al., 1999). Thus, it should be described as a different KER that could lead to development of different AOP.

3.2 KER: inhibition of NMDARs (KE upstream) leads to decreased calcium influx (KE downstream)
3.2.1 KE downstream: reduced calcium influx
Under physiological conditions, the free intracellular Ca2+ concentration is lower (100 nM) than the extracellular Ca2+ concentration (1.2 mM). The latter under certain conditions may enter the cell and accumulate in the cytoplasm, cellular organelles (e.g., mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum) and nucleus (Berridge et al., 2000).

Ca2+ acts as an important intracellular messenger and consequently regulates many different cellular functions (Berridge, 2012; Hagenston and Bading, 2011). Therefore,Ca2+ homeostasis is tightly regulated by intracellular and extracellular mechanisms (Barhoumi et al., 2010). In neurons, Ca2+ ions regulate many critical functions such as postsynaptic depolarisation and activation of Ca2+-sensitive proteins that trigger signalling pathways critical for cell physiology. Modification of the gene transcription by Ca2+ ions impacts long-term neurotransmitters release (reviewed in Neher and Sakaba, 2008), neuronal differentiation (Toth et al., 2016), synapse function (Wang and Peng, 2016) and cell viability (Higley and Sabatini, 2012). Thus, the Ca2+ that enters and accumulates in cytoplasm and nucleus is a central signalling molecule that regulates fundamental for learning and memory processes (Berridge, 2012; Hagenston and Bading, 2011).

3.2.2 WoE evaluation
3.2.2.1 Biological plausibility for KER
The biological plausibility of the relationship between the KEupstream Inhibition of NMDARs function and the KEdownstream Decreased Calcium influx is strong (Fig. 3B). The functional evaluation of NMDA receptors is commonly carried out by measurement of intracellular influx of Ca2+ upon NMDA receptor stimulation or inhibition. Calcium imaging techniques have been extensively utilised to investigate the relationship between these two KEs. Almost 15% of the current through NMDA receptors is mediated by Ca2+ under physiological conditions (Higley and Sabatini, 2012). However, the majority of the Ca2+ ions are rapidly eliminated by binding of calcium to proteins, reaching rapidly ~1 μM of free intracellular calcium concentration (Higley and Sabatini, 2012). In rat primary forebrain cultures, the intracellular Ca2+ increases after activation of the NMDA receptor and this increase is blocked when the experiments are performed under Ca2+ free conditions, demonstrating that the NMDA-evoked increase in intracellular Ca2+ derives from extracellular and not intracellular sources (Liu et al., 2013).

3.2.2.2 Empirical support for linkage
There are a few studies examining the effect of Pb2+ exposure on the changes in intracellular Ca2+. Incubation of rat synaptosomes with Pb2+ stimulates the activity of calmodulin reaching the higher effect at 30 μM, whereas higher concentrations of Pb2+ causes inhibition (Sandhir and Gill, 1994). The Pb2+ IC50 values for inhibition of Ca2+ ATPase has been found to be 13.34 and 16.69 μM in calmodulin-rich and calmodulin-depleted synaptic plasma membranes, respectively. Exposure of rats to Pb2+ has also inhibitory effect on Ca2+ ATPase activity, causing increase in intra-synaptosomal Ca2+ (Sandhir and Gill, 1994).

Furthermore, there is evidence that Pb2+ exposure affects Ca2+ homeostasis causing alterations in the phosphorylation state of different kinases. For example, Pb2+ has been shown to interfere with MAPK signalling increasing the phosphorylation of both ERK1/2 and p38(MAPK) (Cordova et al., 2004). However, the findings regarding calcium/calmodulin kinase II (CamKII) activity after exposure to Pb2+ are not clear (Toscano and Guilarte, 2005). On one hand, Pb2+ has been found to cause reduction of CREB phosphorylation in the hippocampus of rats exposed during brain development (Toscano et al., 2002, Toscano et al., 2003). One the other, the levels of phosphorylation of CamKII have not been explored but only the mRNA expression levels have been studied in rat pups on PND 25 that received Pb2+ (180 and 375-ppm lead acetate in food for 30 days) and reached blood Pb2+ levels 5.8 to 10.3 μg/dl on PND 55 (Schneider et al., 2012). In this study, CamKIIα gene expression has been found to be very sensitive to Pb2+ exposure in the frontal cortex (Schneider et al., 2012).

Pb2+ (10 μM) exposure impairs LTP in CA1 region of hippocampus derived from Sprague-Dawley rats (15–18 PND) as it has been recorded by whole cell patch-clamp technique (Li et al., 2006). Pb2+ chronically or acutely applied, significantly reduces LTP in CA1 region of hippocampus from Wistar or Sprague-Dawley rats (30 and 60 PND) (Carpenter et al., 2002). In CA3, there have been was a dramatic difference in response as the age of animals increased. At 30 days, LTP was significantly reduced but at 60 days LTP was increased by about 30% (Carpenter et al., 2002). In the same brain structure and area (CA3), the effects of Pb2+ on LTP have been different in rats exposed to PND 30 and PND 60 after either perfusion of Pb2+ or from slices derived from rats after chronic developmental exposure to Pb2+ (Hussain et al., 2000). Inhibition of LTP has been recorded in CA3 area from animals sacrificed on PND 30, whereas potentiation has been measured in the same brain area derived from older animals (PND 60) with either exposure paradigm.

However, when somebody interprets results related to this KER there is need to take into consideration the following parameters, which could explain some inconsistencies: (a) the structural diversity of NMDA subunits at different windows of brain development can influence the functionality of the receptors and their permeability to Ca2+ (Higley and Sabatini, 2012); (b) the membrane potential due to pore blockade by extracellular Mg2+ and receptor phosphorylation (Higley and Sabatini, 2012); (c) the entrance of Ca2+ into neuronal cell that can also happen through KA and AMPA receptors but at much lower extend in compareson to NMDA receptors (Higley and Sabatini, 2012). However, AMPA receptors may also contribute to Ca2+ signalling during CNS development (Cohen and Greenberg, 2008); (d) Ca2+ entry occurs also through L-type voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels (L-VDCCs) (Felix, 2005), suggesting that there are more possible entrance sites for Ca2+ to get into the cytosol rather than only through NMDA receptors; (e) Pb2+ has the ability to mimic or even compete with Ca2+ in the CNS, accumulating in the same mitochondrial compartment as Ca2+ (Flora et al., 2006). So, it is possible that the reduced levels of Ca2+ after Pb2+ exposure may not be attributed only to NMDA receptor inhibition but also to the ability of this heavy metal to compete with Ca2+.

3.3 KER: decreased calcium influx (KE upstream) leads to reduced release of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (KE downstream)
3.3.1 KE downstream: reduced release of BDNF
BDNF initially is synthesised as precursor proteins (proBDNF), which is processed intracellularly to its mature form (mBDNF) after proteolytically cleaved in the synaptic cleft by plasmin, which is a protease activated by tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) (Cohen-Cory et al., 2010; Leal et al., 2017). proBDNF is constantly secreted while tPA release and mBDNF production depends on neuronal excitation (Head et al., 2009). Storage and activity-dependent release of BDNF has been demonstrated in both dendrites and axon terminals (Waterhouse and Xu, 2009).

The biological functions of mBDNF are mediated by binding to tyrosine kinase B (TrkB) receptors that lead to the activation of three major intracellular signalling pathways, including MAPK, PI3K and PLCγ1 (Soulé et al., 2006). TrkB-mediated signalling regulates gene transcription in the nucleus through the activation of several transcription factors involved in neurite outgrowth, synaptogenesis, synapse maturation and stabilization (Lu et al., 2005; Nelson and Alkon, 2014). On the other hand, proBDNF binds to the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) and activates RhoA, a small GTPase that regulates actin cytoskeleton polymerization leading to inhibition of axonal elongation, growth cone collapse, and apoptosis (Yamauchi et al., 2004; Head et al., 2009).

3.3.2 WoE evaluation
3.3.2.1 Biological plausibility for this KER
There is extensive scientific understanding of the functional and structural mechanistic relationship between KEup: Decreased Calcium influx and the following KEdown: Reduced release of BDNF (Fig. 3C). BDNF transcription is induced by Ca2+ entering in the neurons through either L type voltage gated calcium channel (L-VGCC) (Tao et al., 1998) or NMDA receptor (Tabuchi et al., 2000; Zheng et al., 2011). BDNF IV that is the most studied among its different exons has been shown to bind three Ca2+ elements within the regulatory region (Zheng et al., 2012). Ca2+ binds to CREB facilitating BDNF transcription. The activation of the relevant transcription factor is triggered by the initial activation of CaM kinase, cAMP/PKA and Ras/ERK1/2 pathways mediated by the elevated intracellular Ca2+. Inhibitory studies, targeting different elements of these pathways, show that Ca2+ can also decrease mRNA BDNF levels (Zheng et al., 2012).

Increase of intracellular Ca2+ levels phosphorylates MeCP2, which inactivates its repressor function and permits the transcription of BDNF exon IV (Tao et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2006). Indeed, NMDA receptor activation has been shown to upregulate BDNF transcripts containing exon IV not only via Ca2+-dependent CREB but also through Ca2+ activation of MeCP2 transcription (Jiang et al., 2005; Zheng et al., 2011).

3.3.2.2 Empirical support for linkage
There is no direct evidence linking reduced levels of intracellular Ca2+ to decreased BDNF levels as they have not been ever measured both in the same study after exposure to stressors. However, there are findings that strongly link the Ca2+-dependent signalling cascade to transcription of BDNF.

Pb2+ decreases the ratio of phosphorylated versus total MeCP2 and consequently MeCP2 maintains its repressor function and prevents BDNF exon IV transcription (Stansfield et al., 2012). MeCP2 gene expression in the frontal cortex is very sensitive to Pb2+ exposure while in the hippocampus, the same gene is affected only at the higher exposure of rat pups (PND 55) with blood Pb2+ levels 5.8 to 10.3 μg/dl (Schneider et al., 2012). The doses of Pb2+ that result in learning and LTP deficits in rats cause also the decrease in phosphorylation of CREB in cerebral cortex at PND 14 and the reduction in phosphorylation state of CREB in both cortex and hippocampus at PND 50 (Toscano et al., 2002, Toscano et al., 2003). Interestingly, under similar experimental conditions no alteration at the phosphorylation state of CAMKII has been recorded (Toscano and Guilarte, 2005).

In primary hippocampal neurons exposed to 1 μM Pb2+ for 5 days during the period of synaptogenesis (DIV7–DIV12), both proBDNF protein levels and mBDNF were decreased with the latter to smaller extend (Neal et al., 2010). In the same in vitro model, Pb2+ also decreases dendritic proBDNF protein levels along the length of the dendrites and causes impairment of BDNF vesicle transport to sites of release in dendritic spines (Stansfield et al., 2012). Rat pups on PND 25 exposed to Pb2+ (180 and 375-ppm lead acetate in food for 30 days) demonstrated blood Pb2+ levels 5.8 to 10.3 μg/dl on PND 55 and show no change at gene levels of BDNF (Schneider et al., 2012). In mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), Bdnf exon IV has been found to be down-regulated in cells treated with 0.1 μM Pb2+, whereas Bdnf exon IX has been found up-regulated (Sánchez-Martín et al., 2013).

3.4 KER: reduced release of BDNF (KE upstream) leads to aberrant dendritic morphology (KE downstream)
3.4.1 KE downstream: Aberrant dendritic morphology
After becoming post-mitotic and during the differentiation process, neuronal cells undergo lengthening, branching, dendrite and dendritic spine formation (Scott and Luo, 2001). In human, dendrites appear as early as 13.5 weeks gestation in neurons while arborization begins only after 26 weeks (Mrzljak et al., 1988, Mrzljak et al., 1990). In rodents, during the first postnatal week, both pyramidal and nonpyramidal neurons go through extensive and fast dendrite growth, branching, and elaboration. Dendrite arbor's capacity and complexity continue to increase in the second and third postnatal week, however, much slower. During the same developmental window, dendritic spines begin to appear as a group that then mature (Dailey and Smith, 1996). At this final stage of dendrite growth, a neuron possesses a dynamic dendrite tree, which has a greater potential for connectivity and synapse creation because of dendritic spine formation and maturation. Postsynaptic density-95 (PSD-95), a protein involved in dendritic spine maturation and clustering of synaptic signalling proteins, plays a critical role in regulating dendrite outgrowth and branching, independent of its synaptic functions (Kornau et al., 1995).

Functionally, dendrites serve as post-synaptic part of a synapse, playing a critical role in the processing of information transmitted through synapses. They receive the majority of synaptic inputs comparing to the soma or the axon. Postsynaptic activity is closely related to the properties of the dendritic arbor itself, implying that the dendrites strongly influence and control synaptic transmission and plasticity (Sjöström et al., 2008; Segal, 2017).

3.4.2 WoE evaluation
3.4.2.1 Biological plausibility for this KER
There is extensive scientific understanding of the functional mechanistic relationship between KEup Reduced release of BDNF and the following KEdown Aberrant Dendritic Morphology (Fig. 3D). After activation of tyrosine kinase B (TrkB) receptors by BDNF, proteins such as Arc, Homer2, LIMK1 are released (Schratt et al., 2004; Yin et al., 2002). These proteins that are known to promote actin polymerization lead to enlargement of dendritic spine heads (Sala et al., 2001). It has also been shown that BDNF promotes dendritic spine formation by interacting with Wnt signalling. Indeed, Wnt signalling inhibition in cultured cortical neurons causes disruption in dendritic spine development, reduction in dendritic arbor size, complexity and blockage of BDNF-induced dendritic spine formation and maturation (Hiester et al., 2013). In addition, it has been shown that the inhibition of BDNF synthesis reduces the size of spine heads and impairs LTP (An et al., 2008; Waterhouse and Xu, 2009). BDNF has been characterised as a critical factor in promoting dendritic morphogenesis in various types of neurons (Jan and Jan, 2010; Park and Poo, 2013). BDNF synthesised in dendrites is known to regulate the morphology of spines (Tyler and Pozzo-Miller, 2003; An et al., 2008). For example, spines in the absence of spontaneous electrical activity are significantly smaller than normal (Harvey et al., 2008). On the other hand, simultaneous electrical activity and Glu release increase the size of the spine head, which has been shown to be dependent on BDNF presence (Tanaka et al., 2008).

Mice caring the Val66Met mutation of Bdnf gene show dendritic arborization defects in the hippocampus. Interestingly, human subjects with the Val66Met SNP demonstrate similar anatomical features (reviewed in Cohen and Greenberg, 2008).

3.4.2.2 Empirical support for linkage
There is no direct evidence linking decreased BDNF levels to aberrant dendritic morphology as they have not been ever measured both in the same study after exposure to stressors. However, several studies provide empirical support for this KER. The reduction in the length of dendritic processes and the number of dendritic branches in hippocampal dentate granule cells was demonstrated after developmental Pb2+ exposure of Long-Evans hooded rat pups (Alfano and Petit, 1982). More recently, it has been shown that the chronic exposure of rats to environmentally relevant levels (Pb2+ blood levels 25.8 ± 1.28 μg/dl) during early life alters cell morphology in the dentate gyrus as immature granule cells immunelabelled with doublecortin display aberrant dendritic morphology (Verina et al., 2007).

Exposure of rats to Pb2+ that was initiated at embryonic phase and terminated at PND 21 revealed that at PND 14 (Pb2+ concentration in the hippocampus 0.249 ± 0.06 μg/g) and PND 21 (Pb2+ concentration in the hippocampus 0.471 ± 0.11 μg/g) the number of dendritic spine on hippocampal CA1 area decreases by 32.83% and 24.11%, respectively (Hu et al., 2014). In separate in vivo study, low blood levels of Pb2+ (10 ± 1.28 μg/dl) in similar age of rats has led to significant decrease of BDNF concentration (pg/mg protein) by 39% in forebrain cortex and by 29% in hippocampus (Baranowska-Bosiacka et al., 2013).

In cultured rat hippocampal neurons, low levels of Pb2+ (0.1 and 1 μM) cause reduction of dendritic spine density in a concentration-dependent manner (Hu et al., 2014). In the same in vitro model, exposure to 1 μM Pb2+ for 5 days during the period of synaptogenesis (DIV7–DIV12), significantly reduces proBDNF protein and extracellular levels of mBDNF (Neal et al., 2010). When mouse embryonic stem cells are differentiated into neurons, exposure to lead (II) acetate causes reduction in the percentage of microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP-2)-positive cells and in the mRNA levels of MAP-2, which is a dendrite marker, in a concentration-dependent manner (Baek et al., 2011).

3.5 KER: reduced release of BDNF (KE upstream) leads to reduced presynaptic release of glutamate (KE downstream)
3.5.1 KE downstream: reduced presynaptic release of glutamate
Glu is an amino acid, the main excitatory neurotransmitter that is stored in presynaptic vesicles by the action of vesicular glutamate transporters (VGLUTs). Glu is mainly released from the presynaptic vesicles in a Ca2+-dependent mechanism that involves N- and P/Q-type voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels, closely linked to vesicle docking sites (reviewed in Meldrum, 2000). The pre-synaptic release of Glu is controlled by a wide range of presynaptic receptors that are not only glutamatergic like Group II and Group III of glutamate metabotropic receptors but also cholinergic such as nicotinic and muscarinic, adenosine (A1), kappa opioid, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)B, cholecystokinin and neuropeptide Y (Y2) receptors. Following its release, Glu exerts its effects via ionotropic and metabotropic receptors. Although Glu is available for binding to receptors for a short time, NMDA receptors show high affinity for this specific neurotransmitter that causes their activation compared to other receptors. Astrocytes play an important role in removing glutamate from synaptic cleft (Verkhratsky and Butt, 2007).

During development, glutamate is known to play important role as it regulates neurogenesis, neurite outgrowth, synaptogenesis and apoptosis (Meldrum, 2000; Mattson, 2008).

3.5.2 WoE evaluation
3.5.2.1 Biological plausibility for this KER
The functional mechanistic relationship between KEup Reduced release of BDNF and the following KEdown Reduced presynaptic release of glutamae is not completely established (Fig. 3E). It has been shown that presynaptically activated TrkB receptors by BDNF enhances Glu release and increases the frequency of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) in hippocampal neurons of rat (Minichiello, 2009). It has been reported that BDNF rapidly induces Glu transporter-mediated glutamate release via phospholipase C-γ (PLC-γ)/Ca2+ signalling. In contrast, it has been shown that antidepressants enhance PLC-γ/Ca2+ signalling leading to reduced levels of BDNF that cause decreased Glu release (Numakawa et al., 2002; Yagasaki et al., 2006). However, in heterozygous BDNF-knockout (BDNF+/−) mice it has been demonstrated that the reduced BDNF levels did not affect presynaptic Glu release (Meis et al., 2012).

3.5.2.2 Empirical support for linkage
In cortical cultured neurons obtained from rat pups PND 2-3, BDNF fails to induce Glu release at DIV 3 and 4. However, after 5 days in vitro culture or later (DIV 6-9), BDNF (5 or 100 ng/ml) induces significant Glu release within 1 min after exogenous BDNF application (Numakawa et al., 2002). No studies have been found in the literature measuring both KEs after exposure to the same stressors. Interestingly, proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in adults with childhood lead exposure shows decrease in Glu and glutamine in vermis and in parietal white matter of the brain (Cecil et al., 2011).

3.6 KER: reduced release of BDNF (KE upstream) leads to neuronal cell death (KE downstream)
3.6.1 KE downstream: cell injury/death
Cell death can be manifested either as apoptosis that involves shrinkage, nuclear disassembly, and fragmentation of the cell into discrete bodies with intact plasma membranes, or as necrosis that involves the loss of plasma membrane integrity (Nicotera et al., 1999). An important feature of apoptosis is the requirement for adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to initiate the execution phase. In contrast, necrotic cell death is characterised by cell swelling and lysis. This is usually a consequence of profound loss of mitochondrial function, resulting in ATP depletion, leading to loss of ion homeostasis and increased Ca2+ levels. The latter activates a number of nonspecific hydrolases (i.e., proteases, nucleases, and phospholipases) as well as calcium dependent kinases. Activation of calpain I, the Ca2+-dependent cysteine protease cleaves the death-promoting Bcl-2 family members Bid and Bax which translocate to mitochondrial membranes, resulting in release of truncated apoptosis-inducing factor (tAIF), cytochrome c and endonuclease in the case of Bid and cytocrome c in the case of Bax (Momeni, 2011). Two alternative pathways - either extrinsic (receptor-mediated) or intrinsic (mitochondria-mediated) - lead to apoptotic cell death. The initiation of apoptosis begins either at the plasma membrane with the binding of TNF or FasL to their cognate receptors or within the cell through mitochondria mediated pathways of apoptosis.

3.6.2 WoE evaluation
3.6.2.1 Biological plausibility for this KER
There is extensive scientific understanding of the functional mechanistic relationship between KEup Reduced release of BDNF and the following KEdown Neuronal cell death. BDNF is involved in the apoptosis occurring in developing neurons through two distinct mechanisms (Bernd, 2008) (Fig. 3F). mBDNF can trigger prosurvival signalling after binding to TrkB receptor through inactivation of components of the cell death machinery and also through activation of the transcription factor cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB), which drives expression of the pro-survival Bcl-2 gene (West et al., 2001). On the other hand, proBDNF binds to the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) and activates RhoA that regulates actin cytoskeleton polymerization resulting in apoptosis (Miller and Kaplan, 2001; Murray and Holmes, 2011). It is proved that reduced levels of BDNF can severely interfere with the survival pathway of neurons in different brain regions, leading to cell death (Miller and Kaplan, 2001; Murray and Holmes, 2011).

BDNF mRNA levels dramatically increase between embryonic days 11 to 13 during rat brain development, playing important role in survival and neuronal differentiation (reviewed in Murray and Holmes, 2011). The latter has been supported by transgenic experiments where BNDF−/− mice demonstrated a dramatic increase in cell death among developing granule cells leading to impaired development of the cerebellar cortex layers (Schwartz et al., 1997). The neuroprotective role of BDNF has been further supported by the observed correlation between elevated BDNF protein levels and resistance to ischemic damage in hippocampus in vivo (Kokaia et al., 1996) and K+ rich medium-induced apoptosis in vitro (Kubo et al., 1995).

Several studies addressing apoptosis mainly in the developing cerebral cortex have shown that other mechanism besides neurotrophic factors may be involved. Cytokines, as well as neurotransmitters can potentially activate a number of intracellular proteins that execute cell death (Henderson, 1996; Kroemer et al., 2009), meaning that further branches to this AOP might be added in the future.

3.6.2.2 Empirical support for linkage
Several in vitro and in vivo studies on cortical neurons have demonstrated that the survival of developing neurons is closely related with the activation of the NMDA receptors and subsequent BDNF synthesis/release, fully supporting the BDNF role as a critical neurotrophic factor (Yoon et al., 2003; Hansen et al., 2004). However, there are no studies in scientific literature reporting on change in both KEs, measured in the same experiment, following exposure to Pb2+.

Neonatal mice exposed to Pb2+ (350 mg/kg lead twice every 4 h) and sacrificed after 8–24 h have shown increased apoptotic neurodegeneration in comparison to controls. This effect has been recorded only in animals treated with Pb2+ at PND 7, but not at PND 14 (Dribben et al., 2011), confirming the importance of the time of exposure during development in order for Pb2+ to induce apoptosis. Two to four weeks old rats treated for 7 days with 15 mg/kg daily dose of lead acetate show increased apoptosis in hippocampus (Sharifi et al., 2002). In older rats (30 PND), it has also been shown that Pb2+ (2, 20 and 200 mg/kg/d) can induce apoptosis (Liu et al., 2010). However, in contrast to the first two in vivo studies, the animals in these experiments were old enough to evaluate the most sensitive window of vulnerability of developing neurons to Pb2+ exposure (Liu et al., 2010), confirming that Pb2+ treatment during synaptogenesis leads to significant neuronal cell apoptosis. In vitro evidence of lead-induced apoptosis has also been studied in cultured rat cerebellar neurons (Oberto et al., 1996), and hippocampal neurons (Niu et al., 2002). However, a number of studies demonstrate that deletion of BDNF does not lead to significant apoptotic cell death of neurons in the developing CNS (reviewed in Dekkers et al., 2013). In an in vivo Pb2+ exposure study, where female rats received 1500 ppm prior, during breeding and lactation shows no changes at mRNA levels of BDNF in different hippocampus section derived from their pups (Guilarte et al., 2003). Regarding Pb2+, the pre- and neonatal exposure of rats to Pb2+ (Pb2+ blood levels below 10 μg/dl) show a decreased number of hippocampal neurons but no morphological or molecular features of severe apoptosis or necrosis have been detected in tested brains (Baranowska-Bosiacka et al., 2013), possibly due to effective microglial phagocytosis. After exposure to led reduced concentration (pg/mg protein) of BDNF in brain homogenates has been recorded in forebrain cortex (39%) and hippocampus (29%) (Baranowska-Bosiacka et al., 2013). In other studies, pregnant rats have been exposed to lead acetate (0.2% in the drinking water) after giving birth until PND 20 reaching blood Pb2+ levels in pups of 80 μg/dl. In these animals, hippocampus was the most sensitive to Pb2+ exposure, showing an increase of caspase-3 mRNA as early as PND12 (Chao et al., 2007).

3.7 KER: aberrant dendritic morphology (KE upstream) leads to decreased synaptogenesis (KE downstream)
3.7.1 KE downstream: decreased synaptogenesis
Synaptogenesis follows axonal migration, during which presynaptic and postsynaptic differentiation occurs (Garner et al., 2002). “Synaptic assembly” refers to the mechanisms involved in recruitment of molecules required for differentiation, stabilization and maturation of synapse (Colón-Ramos, 2009). In human, synaptogenesis does not happen at the same time in all brain regions, as the prefrontal cortex lags behind in terms of synapse formation compared to the auditory and visual cortices. In contrast, synaptogenesis appears to proceed concurrently in different brain areas for rhesus monkey (Erecinska et al., 2004).

The period of rapid synaptogenesis or the so-called brain growth spurt is considered one of the most important processes for neuronal networking that take place during brain development (Garner et al., 2002). This process plays a vital role in synaptic plasticity, learning and memory and adaptation throughout life.

3.7.2 WoE evaluation
3.7.2.1 Biological plausibility for this KER
It is well-established that loss of dendritic spine density and aberrant dendrite branch complexity leads to loss of synapse formation (Fig. 3G). Indeed, huge amount of research has been performed on dendrite arbour, dendritic spines and the molecular components of these structures that led to the elucidation of their role in higher order brain functions, including learning and memory (Sjöström et al., 2008). The appearance of extensive dendritic arbor and new spines coincides with synapse formation (Zito et al., 2004). Zhang and Benson (2001) have investigated the role of actin (the main component of dendritic spines) during the early stages of neuronal development by introducing an actin depolymerization protein named latrunculin A and conducting fluorescent imaging of synapse formation. At the early stages of neuronal development, it has been reported that the depolymerisation of filamentous actin (F-actin) significantly reduces the number of stable synapses and the presence of postsynaptic proteins (PSD-95, neuroligins and Bassoon). Most importantly, pre- and postsynaptic vesicles needed for synaptogenesis have not been found at contact sites as a result of depolymerisation of F-actin (Zhang and Benson, 2001), proving the important role of dendritic arbor in synapse formation.

3.7.2.2 Empirical support for linkage
Many studies have indicated that synaptogenesis and dendritic spine formation happen in any order (Bhatt et al., 2009; McAllister, 2007).Newborn rats exposed to 10 mg/ml of lead acetate from PND 2 up to PND 20 and 56 demonstrated significant decrease in spine density as shown in Golgi staining of hippocampal pyramidal neurons in CA1 region (Kiraly and Jones, 1982).

3.8 KER: reduced presynaptic release of glutamate (KE upstream) directly leads to decreased synaptogenesis (KE downstream)
KE upstream: Reduced presynaptic release of glutamate (described in Section 3.5.1)

KE downstream: Decreased synaptogenesis (described in Section 3.7.1)



3.8.1 WoE evaluation
3.8.1.1 Biological plausibility for this KER
Based on the exiting data biological plausibility for this KER was evaluated as strong and empirical support as moderate (Fig. 3H). It is well documented that the presynaptic release of Glu causes activation of NMDA receptors and initiates synaptogenesis through activation of downstream signalling pathways required for synapse formation (e.g. Ghiani et al., 2007). Lack or reduced presynaptic Glu release affects the transcription and translation of molecules required in synaptogenesis (Ghiani et al., 2007). The NMDA receptor activation by Glu during development increases calcium influx, which acts as a secondary signal for synaptogenesis. Eventually, immediate early genes (IEG) activation is triggered by transcription factors and the proteins required for synapse formation are produced (reviewed in Ghiani et al., 2007). Glu released from entorhinal cortex neurons has been shown to promote synaptogenesis in developing targeted hippocampal neurons (Mattson et al., 1988). Similarly, Glu has been found to regulate synaptogenesis in the developing visual system of frogs (Cline and Constantine-Paton, 1990).

The ratio of synaptic NR2B over NR2A NMDAR subunits controls dendritic spine motility and synaptogenesis. The intracellular C terminus of NR2 recruits the signalling and scaffolding molecules necessary for proper synaptogenesis (Gambrill and Barria, 2011).

3.8.1.2 Empirical support for linkage
Reduced presynaptic release of Glu is linked to LTP, which is considered the functional measurement of synaptogenesis. Indeed, measures of presynaptic function at glutamatergic synapses in chronically exposed animals have produced results that can be related to the effects of Pb2+ on Glu and LTP. Animals exposed to 0.2% Pb2+ show decrease of hippocampal Glu release, diminishing the magnitude of hippocampal LTP (Gilbert et al., 1996). Microdialysis experiment in animals exhibiting blood Pb2+ levels of 30–40 μg/100 ml show diminished depolarization-induced hippocampal Glu release (Lasley et al., 1999).

In another study, experiments in rats continuously exposed to 0.1–0.5% Pb2+ in the drinking water beginning at gestational day 15–16 resulted in decreased hippocampal Glu release (Lasley and Gilbert, 2002), confirmed also in hippocampal cultures and brain slices exposed to Pb2+ (Braga et al., 1999; Xiao et al., 2006). The chronic in vivo exposure to Pb2+ during development results in a marked inhibition of Schaffer-collateral-CA1 synaptic transmission by inhibiting vesicular release of Glu, an effect that is not associated with a persistent change in presynaptic calcium entry (Zhang et al., 2015).

3.9 KER: Neuronal cell death (KE upstream) leads to decreased synaptogenesis (KE downstream)
KE upstream: Cell injury/death (described in Section 3.6.1)

KE downstream: Decreased synaptogenesis (described in Section 3.7.1)



3.9.1 WoE evaluation
3.9.1.1 Biological plausibility for this KER
Based on the current mechanistic knowledge biological plausibility and empirical support for this KER was evaluated as moderate (Fig. 3I). Under physiological conditions, in the developing nervous system, apoptosis occurs during the process of synaptogenesis, where competition leads to the loss of excess neurons and to the connection of the appropriate neurons (Buss et al., 2006; Mennerick and Zorumski, 2000). However, increased apoptosis leads to defective synaptogenesis as the reduced number of neurons (besides the ones that have been already eliminated through the physiological process of apoptosis) decreases dendritic fields for receiving synaptic inputs from incoming axons. At the same time the loss of neurons also means that there are less axons to establish synaptic contacts (Olney, 2014), leading to reduced synaptogenesis and decreased neuronal networking. Recently, Dekkers et al. (2013) have reviewed how the apoptotic machinery in developing brain regulate synapse formation and neuronal connectivity. For example, caspase activation is known to be required for axon pruning during brain development to generate neuronal network. In Drosophila melanogaster and in mammalian neurons components of apoptotic machinery are involved in axonal degeneration that can consequently interfere with synapse formation (reviewed in Dekkers et al., 2013).

3.9.1.2 Empirical support for linkage
Synaptogenesis and refinement of the cortical network precedes the programmed cells death of neurons during development (Innocenti and Price, 2005). Elevated blood Pb2+ concentrations in new-born rats prenatally exposed to 30 or 200 mg/l Pb2+ causes postnatally delay in synaptogenesis (McCauley et al., 1982). In this study, Pb2+ treatment depresses synaptic number in pups at PND 11 to 15 but not in older pups (McCauley et al., 1982). In rat hippocampal primary cultures, Pb2+ treatment has no effect on PSD95 puncta density nor has any effect on Synapsin Ia/b total gray value, puncta density, and integrated intensity but reduces the phosphorylation of Synapsin Ia/b (Stansfield et al., 2012). Pb2+ exposure also represses the expression of presynaptic vesicular proteins implicated in neurotransmitter release, such as synaptobrevin (VAMP1) and synaptophysin (SYN) (Neal et al., 2010). In mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) cultured in 3D aggregates, the treatment with Pb2+ causes around 25% of cell loss (Sánchez-Martín et al., 2013). In in vivo model, Pb2+ causes downregulation of Syn1 gene expression in the hippocampus of male offspring (PND 60) derived from female mice exposed to lead acetate in drinking water from 8 weeks prior to mating, through gestation and until postnatal day PND 10 (Sánchez-Martín et al., 2013).

3.10 KER: decreased synaptogenesis (KE upstream leads to decreased neuronal network function (KE downstream)
KE upstream: Decreased synaptogenesis (described in Section 3.7.1)



3.10.1 KE downstream: Decreased neuronal network function
The neuronal network in developing brain shows a slow maturation and a transient passage from spontaneous, long-duration action potentials to synaptically-triggered, short-duration action potentials. At this stage, the neuronal network is characterised by “hyperexcitability”, which is related to the increased number of local circuit recurrent excitatory synapses and the lack of γ-amino-butyric acid A (GABAA)-mediated inhibitory function that appears much later. This “hyperexcitability” disappears with maturation when pairing of the pre- and postsynaptic partners occurs and synapses are formed generating population of postsynaptic potentials and population of spikes followed by developmental GABA switch (reviewed in Erecinska et al., 2004). Glutamatergic neurotransmission is dominant at early stages of development and NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic currents are far more times longer than those in maturation, allowing more calcium to enter the neurons. The processes that are involved in increased calcium influx and the subsequent intracellular events seem to play a critical role in establishment of wiring of neuronal circuits and strengthening of synaptic connections during development (Erecinska et al., 2004). Neurons that do not receive glutaminergic stimulation are undergoing developmental apoptosis. The development of neuronal networks can be distinguished into two phases: an early “establishment” phase of neuronal connections, where activity-dependent and independent mechanisms could operate, and a later “maintenance” phase, which appears to be controlled by neuronal activity (Yuste et al., 1992). These neuronal networks facilitate information flow that is necessary to produce complex behaviours, including learning and memory (Mayford et al., 2012).

3.10.2 WoE evaluation
3.10.2.1 Biological plausibility for this KER
The current mechanistic knowledge of biological plausibility and empirical support for this KER was evaluated as moderate (Fig. 3J). The ability of a neuron to communicate is based on neuronal network formation that relies on functional synapse establishment (Colón-Ramos, 2009). The main roles of synapses are the regulation of intercellular communication in the nervous system, and the information flow within neuronal networks. The connectivity and functionality of neuronal networks depends on where and when synapses are formed. Therefore, the decreased synapse formation during the process of synaptogenesis is critical and leads to decrease of neuronal network formation and function in the adult brain. The developmental period of synaptogenesis is critical for the formation of the basic circuitry of the nervous system, although neurons are able to form new synapses throughout life (Rodier, 1995). The brain electrical activity dependence on synapse formation is critical for proper neuronal communication. Alterations in synaptic connectivity lead to refinement of neuronal networks during development (Cline and Haas, 2008). Indeed, knockdown of PSD-95 arrests the functional and morphological development of glutamatergic synapses (Ehrlich et al., 2007).

3.10.2.2 Empirical support for linkage
At low Pb2+ levels (less than 30 μg/dl), slow cortical potentials have been observed to be positive in children under five years old but negative in children over five years. However, age-related polarity reversal has been observed in children with higher Pb2+ levels (Otto and Reiter, 1984). In experiments carried out in Wistar rats that have been fed with lead acetate (400 micrograms lead/g body weight/day) from PND 2 until PND 60, the electroencephalogram (EEG) findings show statistically significant reduction in the delta, theta, alpha and beta band of EEG spectral power in motor cortex and hippocampus with the exception of the delta and beta bands power of motor cortex in wakeful state (Kumar and Desiraju, 1992).

Male Sprague-Dawley rats have been exposed to Pb2+ from parturition to weaning though their dams' milk that received drinking water containing 1.0, 2.5, or 5.0 mg/ml lead acetate (McCarren and Eccles, 1983). Beginning from 15 weeks of age, the characteristics of the electrically elicited hippocampal after discharge (AD) and its alteration by phenytoin (PHT) showed significant increase in primary AD duration only in the animals exposed to the higher dose of Pb2+, whereas all groups responded to PHT with increases in primary AD duration (McCarren and Eccles, 1983).

In primary rat cortical neurons (12–22 DIV), Pb2+ (50 μM) slightly increases mean firing rate (MFR) as measured by micro-electrode-array (MEA) technology (McConnell et al., 2012).

3.11 KER: decreased neuronal network function (KE upstream) leads to impairment of learning and memory (KE downstream)
KE upstream: Decreased neuronal network function (described in Section 3.10.1)

KE downstream: impairment of learning and memory, the adverse outcome (AO)



3.11.1 AO, learning and memory
Learning can be defined as the process by which new information is acquired to establish knowledge by systematic study or by trial and error (Ono, 2009). Two types of learning are considered in neurobehavioral studies: a) associative learning and b) non-associative learning. The memory to be formed requires acquisition, retention and retrieval of information in the brain, which is characterised by the non-conscious recall of information (Ono, 2009). Memory is considered very important as it allows the subjects to access the past, to form experience and consequently to acquire skills for surviving purposes. There are three main categories of memory, including sensory memory, short-term or working memory (up to a few hours) and long-term memory (up to several days or even much longer). At the cellular level the storage of long-term memory is associated with increased gene expression and protein synthesis as well as formation of novel synaptic connections (Lynch, 2004).

Learning-related processes require neuronal networks to detect correlations between events in the environment and store these as changes in synaptic strength (Abbott and Nelson, 2000). Long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) are two fundamental processes involved in cognitive functions (Abbott and Nelson, 2000; Malenka and Bear, 2004), which respectively, strengthen synaptic inputs that are effective at depolarizing the postsynaptic neuron and weaken inputs that are not, thus reinforcing useful pathways in the brain. The best characterisation form of LTP occurs in the CA1 region of the hippocampus, in which LTP is initiated by transient activation of receptors and is expressed as a persistent increase in synaptic transmission through AMPA receptors followed by activation of NMDARs. This increase is due, at least in part, to a postsynaptic modification of AMPA-receptor function; this modification could be caused by an increase in the number of receptors, their open probability, their kinetics or their single-channel conductance. Summing up activity-dependent alteration in synaptic strength is a fundamental property of the vertebrate central nervous system that underlies learning and memory processes.

It is appropriate to state that while much emphasis has been given on the key role of the hippocampus in memory, it would probably be simplistic to attribute memory deficits solely to hippocampal damage (Barker and Warburton, 2011). There is substantial evidence that fundamental memory functions are not mediated by hippocampus alone but require a network that includes, in addition to the hippocampus, anterior thalamic nuclei, mammillary bodies cortex, cerebellum and basal ganglia (Doya, 2000; Mitchell et al., 2002; Toscano and Guilarte, 2005). Each of these brain structures can be potentially damaged leading to more or less severe impairment of learning and memory.

3.11.2 WoE evaluation
3.11.2.1 Biological plausibility for this KER
Based on the current mechanistic understanding and evaluable empirical data biological plausibility and empirical support for this KER was evaluated as moderate (Fig. 3K). Learning and memory is one of the outcomes of the functional expression of neurons and neuronal networks. Damage or destruction of neurons by a chemical during synaptogenesis when the process of synapses formation takes place, integration and formation of neuronal networks could be impaired causing derange of the synaptic organisation and function. Such changes in the neuronal network formation could lead to subsequent impairment of learning and memory processes. Exposure to the potential developmental toxicants during neuronal differentiation and synaptogenesis will increase risk of functional neuronal network damage leading to learning and memory impairment.

Long-term potentiation (LTP) is a long-lasting increase in synaptic efficacy, and its discovery suggested that changes in synaptic strength could provide the substrate for learning and memory (reviewed in Lynch, 2004; Sweatt, 2016). Moreover, LTP is intimately related to the theta rhythm, an oscillation long associated with learning. Learning-induced enhancement in neuronal excitability, a measurement of neuronal network function, has also been shown in hippocampal neurons following classical conditioning in several experimental approaches (reviewed in Saar and Barkai, 2003). On the other hand, memory requires the increase in magnitude of an excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) to be developed quickly and to be persistent for few weeks at least without disturbing already potentiated contacts. Once again, a substantial body of evidence have demonstrated that tight connection between LTP and diverse instances of memory exist (reviewed in Lynch, 2004).

3.11.2.2 Empirical support for linkage
A series of important findings suggest that the biochemical changes that happen after induction of LTP also occur during memory acquisition, showing temporality between the two KEs (reviewed in Lynch, 2004). Furthermore, a review on Morris water maze (MWM) as a tool to investigate spatial learning and memory in laboratory rats also pointed out that the disconnection between neuronal networks rather than the brain damage of certain regions is responsible for the impairment of MWM performance (D'Hooge and De, 2001). Functional integrated neuronal networks that involve the coordination action of different brain regions are consequently important for spatial learning and MWM performance.

Exposure to low levels of Pb2+, during early development, has been implicated in long-lasting behavioral abnormalities and cognitive deficits in children (reviewed Neal and Guilarte, 2010) and experimental animals (Murphy and Regan, 1999; Moreira et al., 2001). Multiple lines of evidence suggest that Pb2+ can impair hippocampus-mediated learning in animal models (Toscano and Guilarte, 2005; Cao et al., 2008). Rat pups have been exposed to Pb2+ via their dams' drinking water from PND 1 to PND 21 and directly via drinking water from weaning until PND 30 (Jaako-Movits et al., 2005). At PND 60 and 80, the neurobehavioral assessment has revealed that developmental Pb2+ exposure induces persistent increase in the level of anxiety and inhibition of contextual fear conditioning (Jaako-Movits et al., 2005; Salinas and Huff, 2002), being in agreement with observations on humans. Indeed, children exposed to low levels of Pb2+ display attention deficit, increased emotional reactivity and impaired memory and learning (Finkelstein et al., 1998).

In experiments carried out in Wistar rats, fed with lead acetate from PND 2 until PND 60, EEG findings show statistically significant reduction in the delta, theta, alpha and beta band EEG spectral power in motor cortex and hippocampus (Kumar and Desiraju, 1992). After 40 days of recovery, animals have been assessed for their neurobehaviour and revealed that Pb2+ treated animals show more time and sessions in attaining criterion of learning than controls (Kumar and Desiraju, 1992). Further data obtained using animal behavioral techniques demonstrate that NMDA mediated synaptic transmission is decreased by Pb2+ exposure (Cory-Slechta, 1995; Cohen and Cory-Slechta, 1993, Cohen and Cory-Slechta, 1994). Selective impairment of learning and memory was also observed after blockade of long-term potentiation by AP5 (NMDAR antagonist) (Morris et al., 1986).

4 Overall assessment of the AOP for impairment of learning and memory abilities
The aim of the present AOP was to construct a pathway that captures the KEs and KERs that occur after binding of an antagonist to NMDA receptor in neurons during brain development (synaptogenesis) referring mainly to hippocampus and cortex, two fundamental brain structures involved in learning and memory formation. Recent study (Wang et al., 2014) reported that functional connectivity exists in cortical-hippocampal network and that the associative memory improves due to their cooperative function (Wang et al., 2014). Based on the supporting data for all KEs and KERs that are summarised in Table 1 and the modified Bradford-Hill considerations (including biological plausibility, essentiality of KEs, concordance of empirical data) (Users' Handbook (OECD, 2016a) confidence in the supporting data is considered as high.

The Biological plausibility for majority of the identified KERs is well documented as there is extensive mechanistic understanding supporting linkage between relevant KEs upstream and the KEs downstream, except for the KER between decreased neuronal network function that leads to learning and memory impairment. It is still unclear what modifications of neuronal circuits need to happen in order to trigger cognitive deficits, measurable in a learning and memory test (Mayford et al., 2012). This KER is only partially understood and further research is required to better explain the relationship between these two KEs.

Essentiality is also rated high because there is direct experimental evidence for most of the KEs showing that blocking KEs upstream prevents or attenuates the relevant KEs downstream and/or the AO (Table 1). Studies on transgenic animals and specifically designed inhibitors have provided direct evidence indicating the essentiality of the KEs in the mechanism that underpin LTP and underlie learning and memory processes in developing organisms. Memory enhancement studies also supported the essentiality of certain KEs by providing indirect evidence like for example in the case of the KE-Decreased neuronal network function for which is not experimentally possible to get direct evidence.

However, the empirical support for the majority of identified KERs cannot be rated high as in most occasions the KEup and KEdown of a KER have not been investigated simultaneously under the same experimental protocol. Furthermore, quantitative dose-response data on KERs are not available, therefore this AOP is mainly qualitative (not quantitative). Definition of thresholds for KEs upstream to be able to trigger KEs downstream is missing. For this reason WoE only for the first KER (Binding of antagonist toNMDA receptors leads to Inhibition of NMDARs) was rated as strong, for the second KER (Inhibition, NMDARs leads to Decreased, Calcium influx) as “moderate”, whereas all others.Table 1 Assembly of the experimental data to support essentiality evaluation of Key Events (KEs) based on direct or indirect evidence. No contradictory results were found for any of the described KEs. Based on the supporting data, the weight of evidence for all KEs in the context of this AOP, overall, is considered as high.

Table 1Granger et al., 2011; Tang et al., 1999; Shimizu et al., 2000; Brigman et al., 2010; Shimshek et al., 2006; Sakimura et al., 1995; Gray et al., 2011; Haberny et al., 2002; Van der Staay et al., 2011; Ogura and Aigner, 1993; Wayman et al., 2008; Giese and Mizuno, 2013; Lisman et al., 2002; Elgersma et al., 2004; Lucchesi et al., 2011; Coultrap and Bayer, 2012; Patterson et al., 1996; Monteggia et al., 2004;Lu et al., 2008; Fredriksson and Archer, 2004; Creeley and Olney, 2013; Lu et al., 2006; Lo et al., 2015; Bliss and Collingridge, 2013; Redini-Del Negro and Laroche, 1993; Matthies et al., 2000; Holtmaat and Svoboda, 2009; Yang et al., 2009; Fu et al., 2012; Migaud et al., 1998; Janz et al., 1999; Schmitt et al., 2009.



5 Discussion
It is well understood and documented that learning and memory processes rely on the physiology of the NMDA receptor. If the function of this receptor is blocked during brain development (especially synaptogenesis) it can result in learning and memory impairment in children through a cascade of KEs described in this AOP.

Synaptogenesis is a fundamental process of neuronal network formation and if disturbed can results in neurodevelopmental disorders (Habela et al., 2016). Therefore, early life exposure to environmental pollutants is critical in determining whether a child's brain development will provide a strong or weak foundation for future learning abilities. Many factors impact children brain development such as poor nutrition, foetal exposure to infectious agents but it is well proved that exposure to toxic environmental chemicals such as lead can directly impair brain and neurological development in children. Published experimental data, including epidemiological studies (reviewed in Neal and Guilarte, 2010) strongly suggest that environmental chemicals contribute in children to the lowered IQ, learning disabilities, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and, in particular, autism (McDonald and Paul, 2010; Grandjean and Landrigan, 2006, Grandjean and Landrigan, 2014). Lowered intelligence from early childhood exposure to lead exposure alone was estimated to result in about $675 million per year in income lost to those affected in Washington State (Report of Washington State Departments of Ecology and Health, 2009). Clearly learning and memory deficit contributes to learning disability of children who have difficulty in reading, writing and learning new things, significantly interfering with school achievement. The burden of these conditions for families and society includes financial costs related to special education, medical treatment, law enforcement, and the social and emotional toll on the children and caregivers. Therefore, much effort is undertaken, including AOP concept, to scientifically prove which environmental chemicals (singles and in mixture) could trigger a cascade of events leading to cognitive deficit in children.

Learning and memory is an important endpoint or regulatory relevance and a wide variety of tests to assess chemical effects on cognitive functions is available and used for the study of neurotoxicity in adult and young laboratory animals. Currently, neurotoxicity testing guidelines (OECD TG 424, 443, 426 and US EPA OCSPP 870.6300) require testing of learning and memory when DNT or neurotoxicity studies are triggered in order to comply with relevant US and EU regulations (Makris et al., 2009). However, for learning and memory assessment the guidelines methodology is flexible and its sensitivity varies, which may lead to some difficulties in test interpretation (Raffaele et al., 2010; EFSA PPR Panel Scientific Opinion, 2013; Gilbert et al., 2012). Additionally, the OECD DNT TG 426 and US EPA OCSPP 870.6300 are rarely performed since it is costly, time consuming, require high number of laboratory animals and might provide scientifically unreliable information (Crofton et al., 2011, Crofton et al., 2012; Bal-Price et al., 2012, Bal-Price et al., 2015a; Smirnova et al., 2014). Furthermore, these in vivo tests rely mainly on the read-outs of the final adverse effects by observing clinical signs, neurobehavioral performance and neuro-pathological changes recorded after animal exposure to chemicals without providing any mechanistic information on the underlying biological processes leading to the AO. This kind of information is provided within the AOP concept as illustrated in the described AOP. It is one of the first AOPs developed according to the OECD guidelines and underwent reviewing process by the scientists in the field and finally endorsed by the OECD Working Group of National Coordinators of the Test Guidelines Programme (WNT) and Working Party on r Hazard Assessment (WPHA).

AOPs can be used for different regulatory purposes, aiming to use mechanistic toxicological information in order to develop novel testing strategies such as integrated approaches to testing and assessment (IATA) (Tollefsen et al., 2014; OECD, 2016b; Sachana and Leinala, 2017). Indeed, this AOP can provide rational for in vitro assays selection (or development) that should be anchored to the KEs defined in this AOP since causative links described between the identified KEs would increase scientific confidence in such battery of tests (AOP-informed IATA) (Bal-Price and Meek, 2017). These assays should be based on mixed population of human neuronal and glial cells derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (avoiding extrapolation), permitting quantitative evaluation of the KEs (Fig. 1), particularly those close to AO including reduced levels of BDNF (measured by protein and mRNA expression), neuronal differentiation (e.g., measured by neurite outgrowth), synaptogenesis (measured by co-localization or synaptophysin (pre-) and PSD 95 as post-synaptic protein) and neuronal network function by the measurements of neuronal electrical activity. These in vitro assays are already well standardized and ready to be used. Some of the KEs presented in this AOP have already been identified as important endpoints for mapping of available in vitro DNT assays by EFSA (Fritsche et al., 2015; Fritsche, 2016).

Quantitative measurements of the identified KERs are urgently needed to determine the thresholds for upstream KEs to be able to trigger downstream KEs, moving this current qualitative AOP towards more quantitative AOPs. Such quantitative data, combined with a computational modeling to predict human toxicity, could potentially permit risk assessment of compounds working primary via this AOP.

IATA should be based on various sources of information, including not only in vitro methods but also other non-testing methods such as quantitative structure activity relationship (QSAR), read across and in silico modeling. Indeed, computational chemistry methods were already applied to develop QSAR model, which allows to predict the activity of potent competitive NMDA antagonists (MIE). First, various molecular parameters were calculated for a series of competitive NMDA antagonists with known activity to link the computationally calculated parameters to experimentally determined molecules activity. The developed QSAR model allows to predict the activity of a potent competitive NMDA antagonists before its synthesis since only theoretically determined molecular parameters are used for the prediction (Korkut and Varnali, 2003). Another approach was applied to develop a QSAR model for non- competitive antagonists of NMDA receptor has also been developed by studying a series of 48 substituted MK-801 derivatives, permitting to predict the inhibitory activity of a set of new designed compounds (Chtitaa et al., 2015). 2D- and 3D-QSAR models have also been developed to establish the structural requirements for pyrazine and related derivatives selective for NR2B subunit of NMDA receptor antagonists (Zambre et al., 2015). Moreover, AOP based QSAR models can also facilitate grouping of chemicals according to their biological activities (e.g., chemicals that trigger MIE or a particular KE) and subsequent development of read-across approach.

These QSAR models together with in vitro assays anchored to KEs of the described AOP should be included in IATA (AOP-informed IATA) that could serve as a tool for an initial chemical screening and prioritization to identify those with potential to cause learning and memory impairment in children.

However, this AOP represents one of many possible cascade of events leading to learning and memory impairment in children. Further development of AOPs, interconnected into network is required to have more comprehensive understanding of different toxicity pathways involved. Such AOPs network will facilitate identification of common KEs for multiple AOPs that should be considered as anchors for in vitro assays development, increasing probability of identifying potential DNT compounds, even if they cause toxicity through different pathways and triggered by various MIEs.

The present AOP can encourage the development of new in vitro test battery and the use of these alternatives to assess NMDAR inhibitors as chemicals with potential to induce impairment of children cognitive function and at the same time reduce the use of in vivo studies. In addition, the majority of KEs in this AOP has strong essentiality to induce the AO (impairment of learning and memory) and established adjacent relationships between them that would allow not only the development of testing methods that address these specific KEs but also the understanding of the relationship between the measured KEs and the AO. In addition, this AOP is expecting to make significant contribution to a recent international effort that aims to develop an OECD guidance document on DNT evaluation and accelerate the development and use of in vitro assays and other alternative tools capable of cost and time efficient testing of chemicals for their potential to disrupt the development of the nervous system.
==== Refs
References
Abbott L.F.  Nelson S.B.   Synaptic plasticity: taming the beast Nat. Neurosci. 3 2000 1178 1183 11127835 
Alfano D.P.  Petit T.L.   Neonatal lead exposure alters the dendritic development of hippocampal dentate granule cells Exp. Neurol. 75 1982 275 288 7106213 
An J.J.  Gharami K.  Liao G.Y.  Woo N.H.  Lau A.G.  Vanevski F.  Torre E.R.  Jones K.R.  Feng Y.  Lu B.  Xu B.   Distinct role of long 3′ UTR BDNF mRNA in spine morphology and synaptic plasticity in hippocampal neurons Cell 134 2008 175 187 18614020 
Ankley G.T.  Bennett R.S.  Erickson R.J.  Hoff D.J.  Hornung M.W.  Johnson R.D.  Mount D.R.  Nichols J.W.  Russom C.L.  Schmieder P.K.  Serrrano J.A.  Tietge J.E.  Villeneuve D.L.   Adverse outcome pathways: a conceptual framework to support ecotoxicology research and risk assessment Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 29 2010 730 741 20821501 
Baek D.H.  Park S.H.  Park J.H.  Choi Y.  Park K.D.  Kang J.W.  Choi K.S.  Kim H.S.   Embryotoxicity of lead (II) acetate and aroclor 1254 using a new end point of the embryonic stem cell test Int. J. Toxicol. 30 2011 498 509 22013134 
Bal-Price A.  Coecke S.  Costa L.  Crofton K.M.  Fritsche E.  Goldberg A.  Grandjean P.  Lein P.J.  Li A.  Lucchini R.  Mundy W.R.  Padilla S.  Persico A.M.  Seiler A.E.  Kreysa J.   Advancing the science of developmental neurotoxicity (DNT): testing for better safety evaluation ALTEX 29 2012 202 215 22892558 
Bal-Price A.  Crofton K.M.  Leist M.  Allen S.  Arand M.  Buetler T.  Delrue N.  FitzGerald R.E.  Hartung T.  Heinonen T.  Hogberg H.  Bennekou S.H.  Lichtensteiger W.  Oggier D.  Paparella M.  Axelstad M.  Piersma A.  Rached E.  Schilter B.  Schmuck G.  Stoppini L.  Tongiorgi E.  Tiramani M.  Monnet-Tschudi F.  Wilks M.F.  Yikomi T.  Fritsche E.   International stakeholder NETwork (ISTNET): creating a developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) testing road map for regulatory purposes Arch. Toxicol. 89 2015 269 287 25618548 
Bal-Price A.  Crofton K.M.  Sachana M.  Shafer T.J.  Behl M.  Forsby A.  Hargreaves A.  Landesmann B.  Lein P.J.  Louisse J.  Monnet-Tschudi F.  Paini A.  Rolaki A.  Schrattenholz A.  Suñol C.  van Thriel C.  Whelan M.  Fritsche E.   Putative adverse outcome pathways (AOP) relevant to neurotoxicity Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 45 2015 83 91 25605028 
Bal-Price A.  Meek M.E.B.   Adverse outcome pathways: application to enhance mechanistic understanding of neurotoxicity Pharmacol Ther. 179 2017 Nov 84 95 Review 28529068 
Bal-Price A.  Lein P.J.  Keil K.P.  Sethi S.  Shafer T.  Barenys M.  Fritsche E.  Sachana M.  Meek M.E.   Developing and applying the adverse outcome pathway concept for understanding and predicting neurotoxicity Neurotoxicology 59 2017 240 255 27212452 
Baranowska-Bosiacka I.  Strużyńska L.  Gutowska I.  Machalińska A.  Kolasa A.  Kłos P.  Czapski G.A.  Kurzawski M.  Prokopowicz A.  Marchlewicz M.  Safranow K.  Machaliński B.  Wiszniewska B.  Chlubek D.   Perinatal exposure to lead induces morphological, ultrastructural and molecular alterations in the hippocampus Toxicology 303 2013 187 200 23146751 
Barhoumi R.  Qian Y.  Burghardt R.C.  Tiffany-Castiglioni E.   Image analysis of Ca2+ signals as a basis for neurotoxicity assays: promises and challenges Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 32 2010 16 24 19555758 
Barker G.R.  Warburton E.C.   When is the hippocampus involved in recognition memory? J. Neurosci. 31 2011 10721 10731 21775615 
Barria A.  Malinow R.   Subunit-specific NMDA receptor trafficking to synapses Neuron 35 2002 345 353 12160751 
Becker R.A.  Ankley G.T.  Edwards S.W.  Kennedy S.W.  Linkov I.  Meek B.  Sachana M.  Segner H.  Van Der Burg B.  Villeneuve D.L.  Watanabe H.  Barton-Maclaren T.S.   Increasing scientific confidence in adverse outcome pathways: application of tailored Bradford-Hill considerations for evaluating weight of evidence Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 72 2015 514 537 25863193 
Bernd P.   The role of neurotrophins during early development Gene Expr. 14 2008 241 250 19110723 
Berridge M.J.   Calcium signalling remodelling and disease Biochem. Soc. Trans. 40 2012 297 309 22435804 
Berridge M.J.  Lipp P.  Bootman M.D.   The versatility and universality of calcium signalling Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 1 2000 11 21 11413485 
Bhatt D.H.  Zhang S.  Gan W.B.   Dendritic spine dynamics Annu. Rev. Physiol. 71 2009 261 282 19575680 
Blanke M.L.  VanDongen A.M.J.  Van Dongen A.M.   Activation Mechanisms of the NMDA Receptor Biology of the NMDA Receptor 2009 CRC Press Boca Raton (FL) Chapter 13. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK5274/ 
Braga M.F.M.  Pereire E.F.R.  Albuquerque E.X.   Nanomolar concentration of lead inhibit glutamatergic and GABAergic transmission in hippocampal neurons Brain Res. 826 1999 22 34 10216193 
Bliss T.V.  Collingridge G.L.   Expression of NMDA receptor-dependent LTP in the hippocampus: bridging the divide Mol. Brain. 6 2013 5 23339575 
Brigman J.L.  Wright T.  Talani G.  Prasad-Mulcare S.  Jinde S.  Seabold G.K.  Mathur P.  Davis M.I.  Bock R.  Gustin R.M.  Colbran R.J.  Alvarez V.A.  Nakazawa K.  Delpire E.  Lovinger D.M.  Holmes A.   Loss of GluN2B-containing NMDA receptors in CA1 hippocampus and cortex impairs long-term depression, reduces dendritic spine density, and disrupts learning J. Neurosci. 30 2010 4590 4600 20357110 
Buss R.R.  Sun W.  Oppenheim R.W.   Adaptive roles of programmed cell death during nervous system development Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 29 2006 1 35 16776578 
Cao X.  Huang S.  Ruan D.   Enriched environment restores impaired hippocampal long-term potentiation and water maze performance induced by developmental lead exposure in rats Dev. Psychobiol. 50 2008 307 313 18335502 
Carpenter D.O.  Hussain R.J.  Berger D.F.  Lombardo J.P.  Park H.Y.   Electrophysiologic and behavioral effects of perinatal and acute exposure of rats to lead and polychlorinated biphenyls Environ. Health Perspect. 110 2002 377 386 
Cecil K.M.  Dietrich K.N.  Altaye M.  Egelhoff J.C.  Lindquist D.M.  Brubaker C.J.  Lanphear B.P.   Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in adults with childhood lead exposure Environ. Health Perspect. 119 2011 403 408 20947467 
Chao S.L.  Moss J.M.  Harry G.J.   Lead-induced alterations of apoptosis and neurotrophic factor mRNA in the developing rat cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum J. Biochem. Mol. Toxicol. 21 2007 265 272 17912701 
Chtitaa S.  Larifb M.  Ghamalia M.  Bouachrinec M.  Lakhlifia T.   DFT-based QSAR studies of MK801 derivatives for non competitive antagonists of NMDA using electronic and topological descriptors J. Taibah Univ. Sci. 9 2015 143 154 
Cline H.T.  Constantine-Paton M.   NMDA receptor agonist and antagonists alter retinal ganglion cell arbor structure in the developing frog retinotectal projection J. Neurosci. 10 1990 1197 1216 2158526 
Cline H.  Haas K.   The regulation of dendritic arbor development and plasticity by glutamatergic synaptic input: a review of the synaptotrophic hypothesis J. Physiol. 586 2008 1509 1517 18202093 
Cohen J.  Cory-Slechta D.A.   Subsensitivity of lead-exposed rats to the accuracy-impairing and rate-altering effects of MK-801 on a multiple schedule of repeated learning and performance Brain Res. 600 1993 208 218 8435747 
Cohen J.  Cory-Slechta D.A.   Lead exposure potentiates the effects of N-methyl-D-asparate on repeated learning Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 16 1994 455 465 7845327 
Cohen S.  Greenberg M.E.   Communication between the synapse and the nucleus in neuronal development, plasticity, and disease Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 24 2008 183 209 18616423 
Cohen-Cory S.  Kidane A.H.  Shirkey N.J.  Marshak S.   Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and the development of structural neuronal connectivity Dev. Neurobiol. 70 2010 271 288 20186709 
Colón-Ramos D.A.   Synapse formation in developing neural circuits. Curr. Top Dev. Biol. 87 2009 53 79 
Cordova F.M.  Rodrigues L.S.  Giocomelli M.B.O.  Oliveira C.S.  Posser T.  Dunkley P.R.  Leal R.B.   Lead stimulates ERK1/2 and p38MAPK phosphorylation in the hippocampus of immature rats Brain Res. 998 2004 65 72 14725969 
Cory-Slechta D.A.   MK-801 subsensitivity following postweaning lead exposure Neurotoxicology 16 1995 83 95 7603648 
Coultrap S.J.  Bayer K.U.   CaMKII regulation in information processing and storage Trends Neurosci. 35 2012 607 618 22717267 
Creeley C.E.  Olney J.W.   Drug-induced apoptosis: mechanism by which alcohol and many other drugs can disrupt brain development Brain Sci. 3 2013 1153 1181 24587895 
Crofton K.M.  Mundy W.R.  Lein P.J.  Bal-Price A.  Coecke S.  Seiler A.E.  Knaut H.  Buzanska L.  Goldberg A.   Developmental neurotoxicity testing: recommendations for developing alternative methods for the screening and prioritization of chemicals ALTEX 28 2011 9 15 21311847 
Crofton K.M.  Mundy W.R.  Shafer T.J.   Developmental neurotoxicity testing: a path forward Cong. Anom. 52 2012 140 146 
Dailey M.E.  Smith S.J.   The dynamics of dendritic structure in developing hippocampal slices J. Neurosci. 16 1996 2983 2994 8622128 
Dekkers M.P.  Nikoletopoulou V.  Barde Y.A.   Death of developing neurons: new insights and implications for connectivity J. Cell Biol. 203 2013 385 393 24217616 
Delrue N.  Sachana M.  Sakuratani Y.  Gourmelon A.  Leinala E.  Diderich R.   The adverse outcome pathway concept: a basis for developing regulatory decision-making tools. Altern Lab. Anim. 44 2016 417 429 
D'Hooge R.  De Deyn P.P.   Applications of the Morris water maze in the study of learning and memory Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 36 2001 60 90 11516773 
Dingledine R.  Borges K.  Bowie D.  Traynelis S.F.   The glutamate receptor ion channels Pharmacol. Rev. 51 1 1999 7 61 10049997 
Doya K.   Complementary roles of basal ganglia and cerebellum in learning and motor control Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 10 2000 732 739 11240282 
Dribben W.H.  Creeley C.E.  Farber N.   Low-level lead exposure triggers neuronal apoptosis in the developing mouse brain Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 33 2011 473 480 21640820 
EFSA PPR Panel (EFSA Panel on Plant Protection Products and their Residues)   Scientific Opinion on the developmental neurotoxicity potential of acetamiprid and imidacloprid EFSA J. 11 12 2013 3471 (47 pp) 10.2903/j.efsa.2013.3471 Available online: www.efsa.europa.eu/efsajournal ©European Food Safety Authority, 2013 
Ehrlich I.  Klein M.  Rumpel S.  Malinow R.   PSD-95 is required for activity-driven synapse stabilization Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104 2007 4176 4181 17360496 
Elgersma Y.  Sweatt J.D.  Giese K.P.   Mouse genetic approaches to investigating calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II function in plasticity and cognition J. Neurosci. 24 2004 8410 8415 15456813 
Erecinska M.  Cherian S.  Silver I.A.   Energy metabolism in mammalian brain during development Prog. Neurobiol. 73 2004 397 445 15313334 
Felix R.   Molecular regulation of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels J. Recept. Signal Transduct. Res. 25 2005 57 71 16149767 
Finkelstein Y.  Markowitz M.E.  Rosen J.F.   Low-level lead-induced neurotoxicity in children: an update on central nervous system effects Brain Res. Rev. 27 1998 168 176 9622620 
Flora S.J.S.  Flora G.  Saxena G.   Environmental occurrence, health effects and management of lead poisoning Cascas S.B.  Sordo J.   Lead: Chemistry, Analytical Aspects, Environmental Impacts and Health Effects 2006 Elsevier Amsterdam, The Netherlands 158 228 
Fredriksson A.  Archer T.   Neurobehavioural deficits associated with apoptotic neurodegeneration and vulnerability for ADHD Neurotox. Res. 6 2004 435 456 15639778 
Fritsche E.   Report on integrated testing strategies for the identification and evaluation of chemical hazards associated with the developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) In Report of the OECD/EFSA workshop on developmental neurotoxicity(DNT): The use of non-animal test methods for regulatory purposes 2016 OECD Environment, Health and Safety Publications Series on Testing and Assessment 242 
Fritsche E.  Alm H.  Baumann J.  Geerts L.  Håkansson H.  Majosthusmann S.  Witters H.   Literature Review on In Vitro and Alternative Developmental Neurotoxicity (DNT) Testing Methods 12 2015 EFSA Support Publications 4 
Fu M.  Yu X.  Lu J.  Zuo Y.   Repetitive motor learning induces coordinated formation of clustered dendritic spines in vivo Nature 483 2012 92 95 22343892 
Gambrill A.C.  Barria A.   NMDA receptor subunit composition controls synaptogenesis and synapse stabilization Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108 2011 5855 5860 21427228 
Garner C.C.  Zhai R.C.  Gundelfinger E.D.  Ziv N.E.   Molecular mechanisms of CNS synaptogenesis Cell Press 25 2002 243 250 
Gavazzo P.  Gazzoli A.  Mazzolini M.  Marchetti C.   Lead inhibition of NMDA channels in native and recombinant receptors Neuroreport 12 2001 3121 3125 11568649 
Gavazzo P.  Zanardi I.  Baranowska-Bosiacka I.  Marchetti C.   Molecular determinants of Pb2+ interaction with NMDA receptor channels Neurochem. Int. 52 2008 329 337 17706324 
Ghiani C.A.  Beltran-Parrazal L.  Sforza D.M.  Malvar J.S.  Seksenyan A.  Cole R.  Smith D.J.  Charles A.  Ferchmin P.A.  de Vellis J.   Genetic program of neuronal differentiation:330–338. And growth induced by specific activation of NMDA receptors Neurochem. Res. 32 2007 363 376 17191130 
Giese K.P.  Mizuno K.   The roles of protein kinases in learning and memory Learn. Mem. 20 2013 540 552 24042850 
Gilbert M.E.  Mack C.M.  Lasley S.M.   Chronic developmental lead (Pb++) exposure increases the threshold for long-term potentiation in the rat dentate gyrus in vivo Brain Res. 736 1996 118 124 8930316 
Gilbert M.E.  Rovet J.  Chen Z.  Koibuchi N.   Developmental thyroid hormone disruption: prevalence, environmental contaminants and neurodevelopmental consequences Neurotoxicology 33 2012 842 852 22138353 
Grandjean P.  Landrigan P.J.   Developmental neurotoxicity of industrial chemicals Lancet 368 2006 2167 2178 17174709 
Grandjean P.  Landrigan P.J.   Neurobehavioural effects of developmental toxicity Lancet Neurol. 13 2014 
Granger A.J.  Gray J.A.  Lu W.  Nicol R.A.   Genetic analysis of neuronal ionotropic glutamate receptors subunits J. Physiol. 589 2011 4095 4101 21768264 
Gray J.A.  Shi Y.  Usui H.  During M.J.  Sakimura K.  Nicoll R.A.   Distinct modes of AMPA receptor suppression at developing synapses by GluN2A and GluN2B: single-cell NMDA receptor subunit deletion in vivo Neuron 71 2011 1085 1101 21943605 
Guilarte T.R.   Glutamatergic system and developmental lead neurotoxicity Neurotoxicology 18 1997 665 672 9339815 
Guilarte T.R.   Pb2+ inhibits Nmda receptor function at high and low affinity sites: developmental and regional brain expression Neurotoxicology 18 1997 43 51 9215987 
Guilarte T.R.  McGlothan J.L.   Hippocampal NMDA receptor mRNA undergoes subunit-specific changes during developmental lead exposure Brain Res. 790 1998 98 107 9593842 
Guilarte T.R.  Miceli R.C.   Age-dependent effects of lead on [3H]-MK-801 binding to the NMDA receptor-gated ionophore: in vitro and in vivo studies Neurosci. Lett. 148 1992 27 30 1300499 
Guilarte T.R.  Toscano C.D.  McGlothan J.L.  Weaver S.A.   Environmental enrichment reverses cognitive and molecular deficits induced by developmental lead exposure Ann. Neurol. 53 2003 50 56 12509847 
Habela C.W.  Song H.  Ming G.   Modeling synaptogenesis in schizophrenia and autism using human iPSC derived neurons Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 73 2016 52 62 26655799 
Haberny K.A.  Paule M.G.  Scallet A.C.  Sistare F.D.  Lester D.S.  Hanig J.P.  Slikker W. Jr.   Ontogeny of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor system and susceptibility to neurotoxicity Toxicol. Sci. 68 2002 9 17 12075105 
Hagenston A.M.  Bading H.   Calcium signalling in synapse-to-nucleus communication Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 3 2011 a004564 
Hansen H.H.  Briem T.  Dzietko M.  Sifringer M.  Voss A.  Rzeski W.  Zdzisinska B.  Thor F.  Heumann R.  Stepulak A.  Bittigau P.  Ikonomidou C.   Mechanisms leading to disseminated apoptosis following NMDA receptor blockade in the developing rat brain Neurobiol. Dis. 16 2004 440 453 15193300 
Hansen K.B.  Yi F.  Perszyk R.E.  Menniti F.S.  Traynelis S.F.   NMDA receptors in the central nervous system Methods Mol. Biol. 1677 2017 1 80 28986865 
Harvey C.D.  Yasuda R.  Zhong H.  Svoboda K.   The spread of Ras activity triggered by activation of a single dendritic spine Science 321 2008 136 140 18556515 
Head B.P.  Patel H.H.  Niesman I.R.  Drummond J.C.  Roth D.M.  Patel P.M.   Inhibition of p75 neurotrophin receptor attenuates isoflurane-mediated neuronal apoptosis in the neonatal central nervous system Anesthesiology 110 2009 813 825 19293698 
Henderson C.E.   Programmed cell death in the developing nervous system Neuron 17 1996 579 585 8893016 
Hiester B.G.  Galati D.F.  Salinas P.C.  Jones K.R.   Neurotrophin and Wnt signalling cooperatively regulate dendritic spine formation Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 56 2013 115 127 23639831 
Higley M.J.  Sabatini B.L.   Calcium signalling in dendritic spines Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 4 2012 a005686 
Holtmaat A.  Svoboda K.   Experience-dependent structural synaptic plasticity in the mammalian brain Nat Rev Neurosci. 10 2009 647 658 19693029 
Hu F.  Xu L.  Liu Z.-H.  Ge M.-M.  Ruan D.-Y.  Wang H.L.   Developmental lead exposure alters synaptogenesis through inhibiting canonical Wnt pathway in vivo and in vitro PLoS One 9 7 2014 e101894 
Hussain R.J.  Parsons P.J.  Carpenter D.O.   Effects of lead on long-term potentiation in hippocampal CA3 vary with age Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 121 2000 243 252 10876039 
Ikonomidou C.  Bosch F.  Miksa M.  Bittigau P.  Vöckler J.  Dikranian K.  Tenkova T.I.  Stefovska V.  Turski L.  Olney J.W.   Blockade of NMDA receptors and apoptotic neurodegeneration in the developing brain Science 283 1999 70 74 9872743 
Innocenti G.M.  Price D.J.   Exuberance in the development of cortical networks Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6 2005 955 965 16288299 
Jaako-Movits K.  Zharkovsky T.  Romantchik O.  Jurgenson M.  Merisalu E.  Heidmets L.T.  Zharkovsky A.   Developmental lead exposure impairs contextual fear conditioning and reduces adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the rat brain Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 23 2005 627 635 16150564 
Jan Y.N.  Jan L.Y.   Branching out: mechanisms of dendritic arborization Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11 2010 316 328 20404840 
Janz R.  Sudhof T.C.  Hammer R.E.  Unni V.  Siegelbaum S.A.  Bolshakov V.Y.   Essential roles in synaptic plasticity for synaptogyrin I and synaptophysin I Neuron 24 1999 687 700 10595519 
Jiang X.  Tian F.  Mearow K.  Okagaki P.  Lipsky R.H.  Marini A.M.   The excitoprotective effect of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors is mediated by a brain-derived neurotrophic factor autocrine loop in cultured hippocampal neurons J. Neurochem. 94 2005 713 722 16000165 
Kiraly E.  Jones D.G.   Dendritic spine changes in rat hippocampal pyramidal cells after postnatal lead treatment: a Golgi study Exp. Neurol. 77 1982 236 239 6177547 
Kokaia Z.  Nawa H.  Uchino H.  Elmer E.  Kokaia M.  Carnahan J.  Smith M.L.  Siesjo B.K.  Lindvall O.   Regional brain-derived neurotrophic factor mRNA and protein levels following transient forebrain ischemia in the rat Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 38 1996 139 144 8737677 
Korkut A.  Varnali T.   Quantitative structure activity relationship (QSAR) of competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonists Mol. Phys. 101 2003 3285 3291 
Kornau H.C.  Schenker L.T.  Kennedy M.B.  Seeburg P.H.   Domain interaction between NMDA receptor subunits and the postsynaptic density protein PSD-95 Science 269 5231 22 September 1995 1737 1740 7569905 
Kroemer G.  Galluzzi L.  Vandenabeele P.  Abrams J.  Alnemri E.S.  Baehrecke E.H.  Blagosklonny M.V.  El-Deiry W.S.  Golstein P.  Green D.R.  Hengartner M.  Knight R.A.  Kumar S.  Lipton S.A.  Malorni W.  Nuñez G.  Peter M.E.  Tschopp J.  Yuan J.  Piacentini M.  Zhivotovsky B.  Melino G.  Nomenclature Committee on Cell Death   Classification of cell death: recommendations of the nomenclature committee on cell death 2009 Cell Death Differ. 16 2009 3 11 18846107 
Kubo T.  Nonomura T.  Enokido Y.  Hatanaka H.   Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) can prevent apoptosis of rat cerebellar granule neurons in culture Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 85 1995 249 258 7541321 
Kumar M.V.  Desiraju T.   EEG spectral power reduction and learning disability in rats exposed to lead through postnatal developing age Indian J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 36 1992 15 20 1597338 
Lasley S.M.  Gilbert M.E.   Rat hippocampal glutamate and GABA release exhibit biphasic effects as a function of chronic lead exposure level Toxicol. Sci. 66 2002 139 147 11861981 
Lasley S.M.  Green M.C.  Gilbert M.E.   Influence of exposure period on in vivo hippocampal glutamate and GABA release in rats chronically exposed to lead Neurotoxicology 20 1999 619 629 10499360 
Leal G.  Bramham C.R.  Duarte C.B.   BDNF and hippocampal synaptic plasticity Vitam. Horm. 104 2017 153 195 28215294 
Li X.M.  Gu Y.  She J.Q.  Zhu D.M.  Niu Z.D.  Wang M.  Chen J.T.  Sun L.G.  Ruan D.Y.   Lead inhibited N -methyl-d -aspartate receptor-independent long-term potentiation involved ryanodine-sensitive calcium stores in rat hippocampal area CA1 Neuroscience 139 2006 463 473 16457957 
Lisman J.  Schulman H.  Cline H.   The molecular basis of CaMKII function in synaptic and behavioural memory Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3 2002 175 190 11994750 
Liu J.  Han D.  Li Y.  Zheng L.  Gu C.  Piao Z.  Au W.W.  Xu X.  Huo X.   Lead affects apoptosis and related gene XIAP and Smac expression in the hippocampus of developing rats Neurochem. Res. 35 2010 473 479 19911273 
Liu F.  Patterson T.A.  Sadovova N.  Zhang X.  Liu S.  Zou X.  Hanig J.P.  Paule M.G.  Slikker W. Jr.  Wang C.   Ketamine-induced neuronal damage and altered N -methyl-d -aspartate receptor function in rat primary forebrain culture Toxicol. Sci. 131 2013 548 557 23065140 
Lo S.C.  Wang Y.  Weber M.  Larson J.L.  Scearce-Levie K.  Sheng M.   Caspase-3 deficiency results in disrupted synaptic homeostasis and impaired attention control J. Neurosci. 35 2015 2118 2132 25653368 
Lu B.  Pang P.T.  Woo N.H.   The yin and yang of neurotrophin action Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6 2005 603 614 16062169 
Lu C.  Wang Y.  Furukawa K.  Fu W.  Ouyang X.  Mattson M.P.   Evidence that caspase-1 is a negative regulator of AMPA receptor-mediated long-term potentiation at hippocampal synapses J. Neurochem. 97 2006 1104 1110 16573645 
Lu Y.  Christian K.  Lu B.   BDNF: a key regulator for protein synthesis dependent LTP and long-term memory? Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 89 2008 312 323 17942328 
Lucchesi W.  Mizuno K.  Giese K.P.   Novel insights into CaMKII function and regulation during memory formation Brain Res. Bull. 85 2011 2 8 21070840 
Lynch M.A.   Long-term potentiation and memory Physiol. Rev. 84 2004 87 136 14715912 
Makris S.L.  Raffaele K.  Allen S.  Bowers W.J.  Hass U.  Alleva E.  Calamandrei G.  Sheets L.  Amcoff P.  Delrue N.  Crofton K.M.   A retrospective performance assessment of the developmental neurotoxicity study in support of OECD test guideline 426 Environ. Health Perspect. 117 2009 17 25 19165382 
Malenka R.C.  Bear M.F.   LTP and LTD: an embarrassment of riches Neuron 44 2004 5 21 15450156 
Matthies H.  Schroeder H.  Smalla K.H.  Krug M.   Enhancement of glutamate release by L-fucose changes effects of glutamate receptor antagonists on long-term potentiation in the rat hippocampus Learn. Mem. 7 2000 227 234 10940323 
Mattson M.P.   Glutamate and neurotrophic factors in neuronal plasticity and disease Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1144 2008 97 112 19076369 
Mattson M.P.  Lee R.E.  Adams M.E.  Guthrie P.B.  Kater S.B.   Interactions between entorhinal axons and target hippocampal neurons: a role for glutamate in the development of hippocampal circuitry Neuron 1 1988 865 876 2908450 
Monteggia L.M.  Barrot M.  Powell C.M.  Berton O.  Galanis V.  Gemelli T.  Meuth S.  Nagy A.  Greene R.W.  Nestler E.J.   Essential role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor in adult hippocampal function Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 2004 10827 10832 15249684 
Mayford M.  Siegelbaum S.A.  Kandel E.R.   Synapses and memory storage Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 4 2012 pii, a005751 
McAllister A.K.   Dynamic aspects of CNS synapse formation Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30 2007 425 450 17417940 
McCarren M.  Eccles C.U.   Neonatal lead exposure in rats: II. Effects on the hippocampal afterdischarge Neurobehav. Toxicol. Teratol. 5 1983 533 540 6664411 
McCauley P.T.  Bull R.J.  Tonti A.P.  Lukenhoff S.D.  Meister M.V.  Doerger J.U.  Stober J.A.   The effect of prenatal and postnatal lead exposure on neonatal synaptogenesis in rat cerebral cortex J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 10 1982 639 651 7161819 
McConnell E.R.  McClain M.A.  Ross J.  Lefew W.R.  Shafer T.J.   Evaluation of multi-well microelectrode arrays for neurotoxicity screening using a chemical training set Neurotoxicology 33 2012 1048 1057 22652317 
McDonald M.E.  Paul J.F.   Timing of increased autistic disorder cumulative incidence Environ. Sci. Technol. 44 2010 2112 2118 20158232 
Meis S.  Endres T.  Lessmann V.   Postsynaptic BDNF signalling regulates long-term potentiation at thalamo-amygdala afferents J. Physiol. 590 2012 193 208 22083603 
Meldrum B.S.   Glutamate as a neurotransmitter in the brain: review of physiology and pathology J. Nutr. 130 2000 1007S 1015S 10736372 
Mennerick S.  Zorumski C.F.   Neural activity and survival in the developing nervous system Mol. Neurobiol. 22 2000 41 54 11414280 
Migaud M.  Charlesworth P.  Dempster M.  Webster L.C.  Watabe A.M.  Makhinson M.  He Y.  Ramsay M.F.  Morris R.G.  Morrison J.H.  O'Dell T.J.  Grant S.G.   Enhanced long-term potentiation and impaired learning in mice with mutant postsynaptic density-95 protein Nature 396 1998 433 439 9853749 
Miller F.D.  Kaplan D.R.   Neurotrophin signalling pathways regulating neuronal apoptosis Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 58 2001 1045 1053 11529497 
Minichiello L.   TrkB signalling pathways in LTP and learning Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10 2009 850 860 19927149 
Mitchell A.S.  Dalrymple-Alford J.C.  Christie M.A.   Spatial working memory and the brainstem cholinergic innervation to the anterior thalamus J. Neurosci. 22 2002 1922 1928 11880522 
Momeni H.R.   Role of calpain in apoptosis Cell J. 13 2011 65 72 23507938 
Moreira E.G.  Vassilieff I.  Vassilieff V.S.   Developmental lead exposure: behavioral alterations in the short and long term Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 23 2001 489 495 11711252 
Morris R.G.  Anderson E.  Lynch G.S.  Baudry M.   Selective impairment of learning and blockade of long-term potentiation by an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist, AP5 Nature 319 1986 774 776 2869411 
Mrzljak L.  Uylings H.B.  Kostovic I.  Van Eden C.G.   Prenatal development of neurons in the human prefrontal cortex: I. A qualitative Golgi study J. Comp. Neurol. 271 1988 355 386 2454966 
Mrzljak L.  Uylings H.B.  Van Eden C.G.  Judas M.   Neuronal development in human prefrontal cortex in prenatal and postnatal stages Prog. Brain Res. 85 1990 185 222 2094894 
Murphy K.J.  Regan C.M.   Low level lead exposure in the early postnatal period results in persisting neuroplastic deficits associated with memory consolidation J. Neurochem. 72 1999 2099 2104 10217290 
Murray P.S.  Holmes P.V.   An overview of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and implications for Excitotoxic vulnerability in the hippocampus international J. Pept. Vol. 2011 2011 654085 12 pages 
Neal A.P.  Guilarte T.R.   Molecular neurobiology of lead (Pb2+): effects on synaptic function Mol. Neurobiol. 42 2010 151 160 21042954 
Neal A.P.  Stansfield K.H.  Worley P.F.  Thompson R.E.  Guilarte T.R.   Lead exposure during synaptogenesis alters vesicular proteins and impairs vesicular release: potential role of NMDA receptor-dependent BDNF signalling Toxicol. Sci. 116 2010 249 263 20375082 
Neal A.P.  Worley P.F.  Guilarte T.R.   Lead exposure during synaptogenesis alters NMDA receptor targeting via NMDA receptor inhibition Neurotoxicology 32 2011 281 289 21192972 
Neher E.  Sakaba T.   Multiple roles of calcium ions in the regulation of neurotransmitter release Neuron 59 2008 861 872 18817727 
Nelson T.J.  Alkon D.L.   Molecular regulation of synaptogenesis during associative learning and memory Brain Res. 14 2014 01660 01666 pii S0006-8993 
Nicotera P.  Leist M.  Ferrando-May E.   Apoptosis and necrosis: different execution of the same death Biochem. Soc. Symp. 66 1999 69 73 10989658 
Niu Y.  Zhang R.  Cheng Y.  Sun X.  Tian J.   Effect of lead acetate on the apoptosis and the expression of bcl-2 and bax genes in rat brain cells Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi 36 2002 30 33 11955345 
Numakawa T.  Yamagishi S.  Adachi N.  Matsumoto T.  Yokomaku D.  Yamada M.  Hatanaka H.   Brain-derived neurotrophic factor-induced potentiation of Ca2+ oscillations in developing cortical neurons J. Biol. Chem. 277 2002 6520 6529 11741947 
Oberto A.  Marks N.  Evans H.L.  Guidotti A.   Lead (Pb + 2) promotes apoptosis in newborn rat cerebellar neurons: pathological implications J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 279 1996 435 442 8859023 
OECD   Users' Handbook Supplement to the Guidance Document for Developing and Assessing Adverse Outcome Pathways. OECD Series on Adverse Outcome Pathways, no 2016 OECD Publishing Paris 1 
OECD   Guidance document for the use of adverse outcome pathways in developing integrated approaches to testing and assessment (IATA) Series on Testing & Assessment No. 260 2016 
OECD   Revised guidance document on developing and assessing adverse outcome pathways Series on Testing & Assessment No. 184 2017 
Ogura H.  Aigner T.G.   MK-801 impairs recognition memory in rhesus monkeys: comparison with cholinergic drugs J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 266 1993 60 64 8331575 
Olney J.W.   Focus on apoptosis to decipher how alcohol and many other drugs disrupt brain development front. Pediatr. 2 2014 81 25136546 
Ono T.   Binder M.D.  Hirokawa N.  Windhorst U.   Learning and Memory. Encyclopedia of neuroscience 2009 Springer-Verlag GmbH Berlin Heidelberg 2129 2137 
Otto D.  Reiter L.   Developmental changes in slow cortical potentials of young children with elevated body lead burden. Neurophysiological Considerations Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 425 1984 377 383 6588856 
Park H.  Poo M.M.   Neurotrophin regulation of neural circuit development and function Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14 2013 7 23 23254191 
Patterson S.L.  Abel T.  Deuel T.A.  Martin K.C.  Rose J.C.  Kandel E.R.   Recombinant BDNF rescues deficits in basal synaptic transmission and hippocampal LTP in BDNF knockout mice Neuron 16 1996 1137 1145 8663990 
Raffaele K.C.  Rowland J.  May B.  Makris S.L.  Schumacher K.  Scarano L.J.   The use of developmental neurotoxicity data in pesticide risk assessments Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 32 2010 563 572 20398750 
Redini-Del Negro C.  Laroche S.   Learning-induced increase in glutamate release in the dentate gyrus is blocked by the NMDA receptor antagonist AP5 Neurosci. Res. Commun. 13 1993 157 165 
Rezvani A.H.   Involvement of the NMDA system in learning and memory Levin E.D.  Buccafusco J.J.   Animal Models of Cognitive Impairment 2006 CRC Press Boca Raton (FL) Chapter 4. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2532/ 
Rodier P.M.   Developing brain as a target of toxicity Environ. Health Perspect. 103 1995 73 76 
Saar D.  Barkai E.   Long-term modifications in intrinsic neuronal properties and rule learning in rats Eur. J. Neurosci. 17 2003 2727 2734 12823479 
Sachana M.  Leinala E.   Approaching chemical safety assessment through application of Integrated Approaches to Testing and Assessment: combining mechanistic information derived from Adverse Outcome Pathways and alternative methods Appl. In Vitro Toxico. 2017 3 
Sakimura K.  Kutsuwada T.  Ito I.  Manabe T.  Takayama C.  Kushiya E.  Yagi T.  Aizawa S.  Inoue Y.  Sugiyama H.  Mishina M.   Reduced hippocampal LTP and spatial learning in mice lacking NMDA receptor epsilon 1 subunit Nature 373 1995 151 155 7816096 
Sala C.  Piech V.  Wilson N.R.  Passafaro M.  Liu G.  Sheng M.   Regulation of dendritic spine morphology and synaptic function by shank and Homer Neuron 31 2001 115 130 11498055 
Salinas J.A.  Huff N.C.   Lead and conditioned fear to contextual and discrete cues Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 24 2002 541 550 12127900 
Sánchez-Martín F.J.  Fan Y.  Lindquist D.M.  Xia Y.  Puga A.   Lead induces similar gene expression changes in brains of gestationally exposed adult mice and in neurons differentiated from mouse embryonic stem cells PLoS One 8 2013 e80558 
Sandhir R.  Gill K.D.   Alterations in calcium homeostasis on lead exposure in rat synaptosomes Mol. Cell. Biochem. 131 1994 25 33 8047062 
Schmitt U.  Tanimoto N.  Seeliger M.  Schaeffel F.  Leube R.E.   Detection of behavioral alterations and learning deficits in mice lacking synaptophysin Neuroscience 162 2009 234 243 19393300 
Schneider J.S.  Mettil W.  Anderson D.W.   Differential effect of postnatal lead exposure on gene expression in the hippocampus and frontal cortex J. Mol. Neurosci. 47 2012 76 88 22160880 
Schratt G.M.  Nigh E.A.  Chen W.G.  Hu L.  Greenberg M.E.   BDNF regulates the translation of a select group of mRNAs by a mammalian target of rapamycin-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent pathway during neuronal development J. Neurosci. 24 2004 7366 7377 15317862 
Schwartz P.M.  Borghesani P.R.  Levy R.L.  Pomeroy S.L.  Segal R.A.   Abnormal cerebellar development and foliation in BDNF(−/−) mice reveals a role for neurotrophins in CNS patterning Neuron 19 1997 269 281 9292718 
Scott E.K.  Luo L.   How do dendrites take their shape? Nat. Neurosci. 4 2001 359 365 11276225 
Segal M.   Dendritic spines: morphological building blocks of memory Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 138 2017 3 9 27311757 
Sharifi A.M.  Baniasadi S.  Jorjani M.  Rahimi F.  Bakhshayesh M.   Investigation of acute lead poisoning on apoptosis in rat hippocampus in vivo Neurosci. Lett. 329 2002 45 48 12161259 
Shimizu E.  Tang Y.P.  Rampon C.  Tsien J.Z.   NMDA receptor-dependent synaptic reinforcement as a crucial process for memory consolidation Science 290 2000 1170 1174 11073458 
Shimshek D.R.  Jensen V.  Celikel T.  Geng Y.  Schupp B.  Bus T.   Forebrain-specific glutamate receptor B deletion impairs spatial memory but not hippocampal field long-term potentiation J. Neurosci. 26 2006 8428 8440 16914668 
Sjöström P.J.  Rancz E.A.  Roth A.  Häusser M.   Dendritic excitability and synaptic plasticity Physiol. Rev. 88 2008 769 840 18391179 
Smirnova L.  Hogberg H.T.  Leist M.  Hartung T.   Developmental neurotoxicity-challenges in the 21st century and in vitro opportunities ALTEX 31 2 2014 129 156 24687333 
Soulé J.  Messaoudi E.  Bramham C.R.   Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and control of synaptic consolidation in the adult brain Biochem. Soc. Trans. 34 2006 600 604 16856871 
Stansfield K.H.  Pilsner J.R.  Lu Q.  Wright R.O.  Guilarte T.R.   Dysregulation of BDNF-TrkB signalling in developing hippocampal neurons by Pb(2+): implications for an environmental basis of neurodevelopmental disorders Toxicol. Sci. 127 2012 277 295 22345308 
Sweatt J.D.   Neural plasticity and behavior - sixty years of conceptual advances J. Neurochem. 139 2 2016 179 199 
Tabuchi A.  Nakaoka R.  Amano K.  Yukimine M.  Andoh T.  Kuraishi Y.  Tsuda M.   Differential activation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene promoters I and III by Ca2+ signals evoked via L-type voltage-dependent and N -methyl-d -aspartate receptor Ca2+ channels J. Biol. Chem. 275 2000 17269 17275 10748141 
Tanaka J.I.  Horiike Y.  Matsuzaki M.  Miyazaki T.  Ellis-Davies G.C.R.  Kasai H.   Protein synthesis and neurotrophin-dependent structural plasticity of single dendritic spines Science 319 2008 1683 1687 18309046 
Tang Y.P.  Shimizu E.  Dube G.R.  Rampon C.  Kerchner G.A.  Zhuo M.  Liu G.  Tsien J.Z.   Genetic enhancement of learning and memory in mice Nature 401 1999 63 69 10485705 
Tao X.  Finkbeiner S.  Arnold D.B.  Shaywitz A.J.  Greenberg M.E.   Ca2+ influx regulates BDNF transcription by a CREB family transcription factor-dependent mechanism Neuron 20 1998 709 726 9581763 
Tao J.  Hu K.  Chang Q.  Wu H.  Sherman N.E.  Martinowich K.  Klose R.J.  Schanen C.  Jaenisch R.  Wang W.  Sun Y.E.   Phosphorylation of MeCP2 at serine 80 regulates its chromatin association and neurological function Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 2009 4882 4887 19225110 
Tollefsen K.E.  Scholz S.  Cronin M.T.  Edwards S.W.  de Knecht J.  Crofton K.  Patlewicz G.   Applying adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) to support integrated approaches to testing and assessment (IATA) Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 70 2014 629 640 25261300 
Toscano C.D.  Guilarte T.R.   Lead neurotoxicity: from exposure to molecular effects Brain Res. Rev. 49 2005 529 555 16269318 
Toscano C.D.  Hashemzadeh-Gargari H.  McGlothan J.L.  Guilarte T.R.   Developmental Pb2+ exposure alters NMDAR subtypes and reduces CREB phosphorylation in the rat brain Dev. Brain Res. 139 2002 217 226 12480136 
Toscano C.D.  McGlothan J.L.  Guilarte T.R.   Lead exposure alters cyclic-AMP response element binding protein phosphorylation and binding activity in the developing rat brain Dev. Brain Res. 145 2003 219 228 14604762 
Toth A.B.  Shum A.K.  Prakriya M.   Regulation of neurogenesis by calcium signalling Cell Calcium 5 2016 124 134 
Tovar K.R.  Westbrook G.L.   The incorporation of NMDA receptors with a distinct subunit composition at nascent hippocampal synapses in vitro J. Neurosci. 19 1999 4180 4188 10234045 
Traynelis S.  Wollmuth L.P.  McBain C.J.  Menniti F.S.  Vance K.M.  Ogden K.K.  Hansen K.B.  Yuan H.  Myers S.J.  Dingledine R.   Glutamate receptor ion channels: structure, regulation, and function Pharmacol. Rev. 62 2010 405 496 20716669 
Tyler W.J.  Pozzo-Miller L.   Miniature synaptic transmission and BDNF modulate dendritic spine growth and form in rat CA1 neurones J. Physiol. 553 2003 497 509 14500767 
Van der Staay F.J.  Rutten K.  Erb C.  Blokland A.   Effects of the cognition impairer MK-801 on learning and memory in mice and rats Behav. Brain Res. 220 2011 215 229 21310186 
Verina T.  Rohde C.A.  Guilarte T.R.   Environmental lead exposure during early life alters granule cell neurogenesis and morphology in the hippocampus of young adult rats Neuroscience 145 2007 1037 1047 17276012 
Verkhratsky A.  Butt A.   Neuronal-Glial Interactions, in Glial Neurobiology: A Textbook 2007 John Wiley & Sons Chichester, UK 
Villeneuve D.L.  Crump D.  Garcia-Reyero N.  Hecker M.  Hutchinson T.H.  LaLone C.A.  Landesmann B.  Lettieri T.  Munn S.  Nepelska M.  Ottinger M.A.  Vergauwen L.  Whelan M.   Adverse outcome pathway (AOP) development I: strategies and principles Toxicol. Sci. 142 2014 312 320 25466378 
Vinken M.  Knapen D.  Vergauwen L.  Hengstler J.G.  Angrish M.  Whelan M.   Adverse outcome pathways: a concise introduction for toxicologists Arch. Toxicol. 2017 
Wang H.  Peng R.Y.   Basic roles of key molecules connected with NMDAR signalling pathway on regulating learning and memory and synaptic plasticity Mil. Med. Res. 3 2016 26 27583167 
Wang J.X.  Rogers L.M.  Gross E.Z.  Ryals A.J.  Dokucu M.E.  Brandstatt K.L.  Hermiller M.S.  Voss J.L.   2014. Targeted enhancement of cortical-hippocampal brain networks and associative memory Science 345 6200 2014 1054 1057 25170153 
Washington State Departments of Ecology and Health   State Lead Chemical Action Plan: Appendix E Income Effects from Reduced IQ http://www.ecy.wa.gov/biblio/0907008e.html 2009 
Waterhouse E.G.  Xu B.   New insights into the role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor in synaptic plasticity Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 42 2009 81 89 19577647 
West A.E.  Chen W.G.  Dalva M.B.  Dolmetsch R.E.  Kornhauser J.M.  Shaywitz A.J.  Takasu M.A.  Tao X.  Greenberg M.E.   Calcium regulation of neuronal gene expression Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98 2001 11024 11031 11572963 
Wayman G.A.  Tokumitsu H.  Lee Y.S.  Silva A.J.  Soderling T.R.   Calmodulin-kinases: modulators of neuronal development and plasticity Neuron 59 6 Sep 25 2008 914 931 Review. Erratum in: Neuron. 2009 Nov 25; 64(4): 590. Silva, Alcino [corrected to Silva, Alcino J] 18817731 
Xiao C.  Gu Y.  Zhou C.Y.  Wang L.  Zhang M.M.  Ruan D.Y.   Lead impairs GABAergic synaptic transmission in rat hippocampal slices: a possible involvement of presynaptic calcium channels Brain Res. 1088 2006 93 100 16630593 
Yagasaki Y.  Numakawa T.  Kumamaru E.  Hayashi T.  Su T.P.  Kunugi H.   Chronic antidepressants potentiate via sigma-1 receptors the brain-derived neurotrophic factor-induced signalling for glutamate release J. Biol. Chem. 281 2006 12941 12949 16522641 
Yamauchi J.  Chan J.R.  Shooter E.M.   Neurotrophins regulate Schwann cell migration by activating divergent signalling pathways dependent on rho GTPases Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 2004 8774 8779 15161978 
Yin Y.  Edelman G.M.  Vanderklish P.W.   The brain-derived neurotrophic factor enhances synthesis of arc in synaptoneurosomes Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 2002 2368 2373 11842217 
Yang G.  Pan F.  Gan W.B.   Stably maintained dendritic spines are associated with lifelong memories Nature 462 2009 920 924 19946265 
Yoon W.J.  Won S.J.  Ryu B.R.  Gwag B.J.   Blockade of ionotropic glutamate receptors produces neuronal apoptosis through the Bax- cytochrome C-caspase pathway: the causative role of Ca2+deficiency J. Neurochem. 85 2003 525 533 12675929 
Yuste R.  Peinado A.  Katz L.C.   Neuronal domains in developing neocortex Science 257 1992 665 669 1496379 
Zambre V.P.  Hambarde V.A.  Petkar N.N.  Patela C.N.  Sawanta S.D.   Structural investigations by in silico modeling for designing NR2B subunit selective NMDA receptor antagonists RSC Adv. 5 2015 23922 23940 
Zhang W.  Benson D.L.   Stages of synapse development defined by dependence on F-actin J. Neurosci. 21 2001 5169 5181 11438592 
Zhang X.Y.  Liu A.P.  Ruan D.Y.  Liu J.   Effect of developmental lead exposure on the expression of specific NMDA receptor subunit mRNAs in the hippocampus of neonatal rats by digoxigenin-labeled in situ hybridization histochemistry Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 24 2002 149 160 11943503 
Zhang X.L.  Guariglia S.R.  McGlothan J.L.  Stansfield K.H.  Stanton P.K.  Guilarte T.R.   Presynaptic mechanisms of lead neurotoxicity: effects on vesicular release, vesicle clustering and mitochondria number PLoS One 10 5 2015 e0127461 
Zheng F.  Zhou X.  Luo Y.  Xiao H.  Wayman G.  Wang H.   Regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor exon IV transcription through calcium responsive elements in cortical neurons PLoS One 6 2011 e28441 
Zheng F.  Zhou X.  Moon C.  Wang H.   Regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression in neurons J. Pathophysiol. Pharmacol 4 2012 188 200 
Zhou Z.  Hong E.J.  Cohen S.  Zhao W.N.  Ho H.Y.  Schmidt L.  Chen W.G.  Lin Y.  Savner E.  Griffith E.C.  Hu L.  Steen J.A.  Weitz C.J.  Greenberg M.E.   Brain-specific phosphorylation of MeCP2 regulates activity-dependent Bdnf transcription, dendritic growth, and spine maturation Neuron 52 2006 255 269 17046689 
Zito K.  Knott G.  Shepherd G.M.  Shenolikar S.  Svoboda K.   Induction of spine growth and synapse formation by regulation of the spine actin cytoskeleton Neuron 44 2004 321 328 15473970

