
==== Front
Mol PsychiatryMol. PsychiatryMolecular Psychiatry1359-41841476-5578Nature Publishing Group UK London 298920559810.1038/s41380-018-0098-1Expert ReviewBrain age and other bodily ‘ages’: implications for neuropsychiatry Cole James H. james.cole@kcl.ac.uk 12Marioni Riccardo E. 34Harris Sarah E. 34Deary Ian J. 351 0000 0001 2322 6764grid.13097.3cDepartment of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, UK 2 0000 0001 2113 8111grid.7445.2Computational, Cognitive and Clinical Neuroimaging Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK 3 0000 0004 1936 7988grid.4305.2Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 4 0000 0004 1936 7988grid.4305.2Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, MRC Institute of Genetics & Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 5 0000 0004 1936 7988grid.4305.2Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 11 6 2018 11 6 2018 2019 24 2 266 281 30 11 2017 13 4 2018 23 4 2018 © The Author(s) 2018Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative CommonsAttribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate ifchanges were made. The images or other third party material in thisarticle are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unlessindicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is notincluded in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intendeduse is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitteduse, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyrightholder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.As our brains age, we tend to experience cognitive decline and are at greater risk of neurodegenerative disease and dementia. Symptoms of chronic neuropsychiatric diseases are also exacerbated during ageing. However, the ageing process does not affect people uniformly; nor, in fact, does the ageing process appear to be uniform even within an individual. Here, we outline recent neuroimaging research into brain ageing and the use of other bodily ageing biomarkers, including telomere length, the epigenetic clock, and grip strength. Some of these techniques, using statistical approaches, have the ability to predict chronological age in healthy people. Moreover, they are now being applied to neurological and psychiatric disease groups to provide insights into how these diseases interact with the ageing process and to deliver individualised predictions about future brain and body health. We discuss the importance of integrating different types of biological measurements, from both the brain and the rest of the body, to build more comprehensive models of the biological ageing process. Finally, we propose seven steps for the field of brain-ageing research to take in coming years. This will help us reach the long-term goal of developing clinically applicable statistical models of biological processes to measure, track and predict brain and body health in ageing and disease.

Subject terms
NeurosciencePredictive markersGeneticsBiological techniquesissue-copyright-statement© Springer Nature Limited 2019
==== Body
Introduction
As we age, the molecules, cells, tissues, and organs within our bodies undergo changes. The biology of the ageing process is complex [1], and is yet to be fully characterised. Though precise definitions of ageing can be controversial, it can generally be seen as the gradual accumulation of deleterious biological changes accompanying a progressive loss of function [2]. What is uncontentious, however, is that ageing increases the risk of morbidity and mortality in humans, as in most species (c.f., the polyp species Hydra). What is also clear is that humans do not experience biological ageing at the same rate, with pronounced differences in the outward manifestations of ageing being observed (e.g., hair loss, skin wrinkles, presbyopia). The age of onset for age-related diseases is also highly variable, as is individual lifespan. This has motivated biogerontological research efforts to measure ageing from a biological perspective, with the goal of producing ‘ageing biomarkers’ (see Box 1) that are better predictors of disease risk and residual lifespan than chronological age alone [3]. In theory, such a biomarker could be used to predict risk of age-related disease and mortality, to monitor biological ageing over time, and to evaluate potential treatments aimed at improving health during ageing.

Ageing has consequences for the brain and any patient suffering from a chronic psychiatric or neurological disorder will be exposed to ageing effects during the course of their disease. Potentially, by measuring the biological age of the brain in people with neuropsychiatric diseases, we may better understand disease risk and resilience, the effects of these diseases on the ageing brain, and improve predictions of health outcomes by capturing individual differences in the interactions between ageing and disease. The physiological changes associated with brain ageing include the macroscopic (e.g., ventricular enlargement, cortical thinning, decreased post-mortem weight, the accumulation of white matter hyperintensities) [4–6], the cellular (e.g., synaptic pruning, axonal loss, mitochondrial changes, alterations to glial cell numbers) [7–9], through to the molecular (e.g., altered gene expression, disrupted calcium signalling, epigenetic changes) [9–11]. Behaviourally, brain ageing is associated with cognitive decline (commonly described as cognitive ageing; particularly affecting cognitive domains such as information processing speed, memory, reasoning, and executive function) [12, 13], decreased well-being and increased symptoms of low mood [14–16]. Neurodegenerative diseases are also increasingly common in older adults [17], with dementia arguably representing the final common endpoint of various age-related neuropathological insults.

The importance of maintaining a healthy brain during ageing is increasingly being recognised as a goal for society. Not only is the risk of neuropsychiatric diseases increased, but symptoms are exacerbated and prognosis worsened by older age. Accordingly, neuroscientists have taken a biogerontological approach to develop specific in vivo biomarkers to measure brain ageing [18–22]. Here, we outline how these putative brain-ageing biomarkers could potentially provide information about how the brain changes with age and how neuropsychiatric diseases interact with the brain-ageing process. Building on our recent opinion article [23], here we aim to put brain-ageing biomarker research in the context of more classic biogerontological research into blood-derived or physiological ageing biomarkers. Finally, we discuss how and why brain and other bodily ageing biomarkers should be combined, as this may provide insights into more fundamental aspects of biological ageing as well as help predict neuropsychiatric and general health outcomes.

Box 1 Ageing biomarkers The rationale for research into ageing biomarkers is as follows: (i) pronounced individual differences in lifespan are commonly seen in humans, suggesting that chronological time is not directly equivalent to the rate of ageing; (ii) differences in ageing rates are probably mediated by underlying biological processes that influence lifespan and age-related disease manifestation, themselves influenced by genetic factors and environmental conditions; (iii) as human lifespan exceeds the reasonable timescale of interventional trials for improving healthy ageing, methods for accurately measures ageing rates are needed (i.e., ageing biomarkers).

As pointed out by Ludwig & Smoke in 1980 [28], biological age is not something that can be directly observed; instead it must be inferred from quantifiable epiphenomena. These quantifiable epiphenomena (i.e., ageing biomarkers), have long been sought by researchers in the field of biogerontology and take many forms. Candidates include grip strength, gum health, lung function, HbA1C levels, mean arterial pressure, white blood cell count, cell membrane viscosity, corneal endothelial thickness, cholesterol levels or cytomegalovirus optical density, to name but a few. As detailed herein, recent ‘omics research has identified further candidates using profiles of epigenetic, metabolomic, or transcriptomic signatures [69]. More recently, neuroscientific measures derived from neuroimaging are also being considered [23, 128].

Given the plethora of candidates, efforts to standardise the criteria for qualification as an ageing biomarker have been proposed. For example, as reported by Johnson [36], the American Federation for Aging Research stipulated that an ageing biomarker must:Predict the rate of ageing, (i.e., inform where a person is in their total lifespan). It must be a better predictor of lifespan than chronological age.

Monitor a basic process that underlies the ageing process, not the effects of disease.

Can be tested repeatedly without causing harm.

Work in humans and in laboratory animals, so it can be tested in animals prior to validation in humans.



However, as noted by both Johnson and Sprott [36, 129], the second criterion is somewhat contentious. Given that ageing is the major risk factor for many diseases, disentangling which processes are distinct to ageing or to disease, and particularly pre-manifest disease, is extremely challenging. In fact, some ageing and disease processes may well be shared, only differing in degree rather than in form.

Nevertheless, the search for ageing biomarkers has continued apace. Although some studies frame a measure of a single aspect of human biology as a marker of biological age (i.e., implying that this is a global measure for an individual), it appears increasingly unlikely that any such universal biological age measure will be identified [121]. Instead, the growing consensus is on combining data from different aspects of biology to generate composite measures that better reflect a unitary process [37, 119, 120]. In future, it is hoped that increasingly well-characterised datasets containing multiple candidate ageing biomarkers will allow the modelling of both local biological age (e.g., brain age, leukocyte telomere age, blood-cell DNA methylation age) and global, composite biological age. This should enable us to reach the optimal panel of markers of underlying patterns of biological ageing, that can be used for trialling interventional strategies and predicting future age-related health.

Brain ageing, cognitive ageing, and physiological ageing
Neuroimaging, and particularly magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), can provide varied and detailed information on the living human brain. The application of methods derived from the study of artificial intelligence, particularly machine learning, has enabled researchers to use high-dimensional MRI datasets to build predictive statistical models of brain ageing. These models assume a trajectory of brain ageing (Fig. 1) that represents an individual’s accumulation of deleterious changes that lead to alterations in brain function and increased risk of cognitive decline and disease.Fig. 1 Differential trajectories of brain ageing. Illustration of the concept of ageing trajectories, specifically brain ageing. With increasing age, even healthy people are at higher risk of cognitive impairment and brain diseases, eventually reaching a threshold where symptoms appear. Individuals can differ in their brain-ageing trajectories. For example, a person may have genetic or developmental environmental factors that confer a higher rate of ageing throughout life (blue line). Alternatively, someone may experience a traumatic injury or infection in adulthood (black arrow), which results in them following an accelerated (purple line) or accentuated, but stable (yellow line), trajectory of brain ageing. While the example used here is of brain ageing, the same model can be used to conceptualise biological ageing more generally



The models, generally using data from T1-weighted MRI scans of brain structure, are informed by ‘learning’ the relationship between age and brain structure in large samples of healthy adults. Model performance, evaluated by predicting chronological age based on brain scans from new individuals, results in mean prediction errors of less than five years [19, 21, 24–27]. These models can then be used to generate a biological age from neuroimaging data, a ‘brain-predicted age’. Following the established biogerontological model of determining the discrepancy between the chronological and biological age of an organism [28], if an individual’s brain-predicted age is greater than their chronological age, this indicates that their brain structure more closely resembles a healthy person who is older than they are. The assumption is that greater discrepancies between brain-predicted age and chronological age reflect poorer brain health, for a given age. Different research groups refer to this discrepancy using different names (e.g., brain-age gap [GBA], brain-age gap estimate [brainAGE]) [21, 29]; here, we use the term brain-predicted age difference (brain-PAD); mathematically this is chronological age subtracted from brain-predicted age (Fig. 2).Fig. 2 Brain-predicted age and brain-PAD. a The results of using Gaussian processes regression to predict chronological age using structural neuroimaging data in a sample of 2001 healthy individuals, aged 18–90 years, based on ten-fold cross validation (mean absolute error = 4.93 years, r = 0.94). b Same as a, with the brain-predicted age values for participants from the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 overlaid in red. This demonstrates that, despite the narrow age range at time of scanning (72–74 years), these N = 669 individuals had a wide variability in brain-predicted ages. c Illustration of how brain-predicted age difference (brain-PAD) scores are calculated, highlighting the individuals from the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 with the lowest and highest brain-predicted ages. Brain-PAD is the difference between brain-predicted age and chronological age for an individual. Positive brain-PAD suggests that the individual’s brain appears older than their chronological age, whereas a negative brain-PAD suggests that their brain appears younger



This approach to modelling brain ageing makes inferences based on errors in model prediction, hence external validation is essential. Key to validating brain-predicted age is to relate it to other measures of ageing, such as cognitive or physiological assessments. Using data from the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 [30, 31], we recently sought to do this. Using neuroimaging measures of brain volume from this general population, narrow age-range (approximately 73 years old) cohort, brain-PAD was calculated for 669 people [32]. We demonstrated that brain-PAD was significantly negatively related to a composite measure of cognitive function (standardised beta from linear regression = −0.12), designed to reflect ageing-related changes in general, fluid cognitive functioning [33]. Furthermore, in this cohort, brain-PAD was also related to a panel of physiological measures designed to assess health in ageing. Having an older-appearing brain was associated with weaker grip strength (standardised beta = −0.06), poorer lung function (standardised beta = −0.07), and slower time to walk 6 metres (standardised beta = 0.13). This suggests that measures of age-associated brain volume are sensitive to the same underlying factors that cause physiological changes during ageing.

Another potential demonstration of the validity of an ageing biomarker is to consider how such a measure behaves in circumstances of ‘accelerated’ biological ageing. One such example is Down’s syndrome (DS), where trisomy of chromosome 21 results in a broadly progeroid (i.e., resembling older age) phenotype [34, 35]. Our analysis of brain-predicted age in 46 adults with DS showed that the mean brain-PAD was 2.5 years in this group, significantly greater than local healthy control participants (mean brain-PAD = −5.2 years). This suggests that some of the changes to brain structure in DS resemble those seen during ageing, much like the outward physiological manifestations of the syndrome. When considering the variability of brain-PAD scores in participants with DS, those with greater brain-PAD had greater levels of beta-amyloid deposition (measured using Pittsburgh-compound B [PiB] positron emission tomography [PET] scans, standardised beta = 0.29). Interestingly, in individuals with DS who also had signs of amyloid deposition, there was a strong relationship between brain-PAD and cognitive performance (standardised beta = −0.51). This was not seen in DS individuals who were ‘PiB negative’ for amyloid. In other words, people with DS who exhibited signs of some of the key pathological facets of brain ageing (i.e., amyloid deposition, cognitive decline) also had older-appearing brains. This suggests that brain-PAD is a potentially useful method for understanding individual differences in brain ageing in DS, which may in turn relate to risk of Alzheimer’s disease. However, the large effect sizes observed in this relatively small study require replication and longitudinal assessment before brain-PAD can be taken further towards clinical applications in DS.

The relationship of a putative ageing biomarker to residual lifespan (i.e., how much longer a person has to live) is another important measure of validity [36]. Again, using the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936, we assessed whether brain-PAD related to survival after MRI scanning at age ~73 years. Mortality data up to age ~80 years were obtained via linkage with healthcare records in Scotland. At time of analysis, 10.9% (n = 73 out of 669) of the participants had died. Here, brain-PAD was a significant predictor of survival in a Cox proportional hazards regression model, whereby having an older-appearing brain was associated with reduced survival times (Fig. 3). Specifically, for each additional year of brain ageing (+1 year brain-PAD) there was a 6% increase in the likelihood of death (hazard ratio = 1.06, 95% confidence intervals 1.03–1.09) [32]. Interestingly, the most common cause of death was cardiac disease, suggesting that brain ageing is not causing death per se, but that the brain is sensitive to the deleterious consequences of ageing that occur more systemically. As Jackson et al. [37] pointed out, “while the selected biomarkers are not thought to be specific harbingers of death, their rates of decline are assumed to reflect a decline in organ and system efficiency, and hence to qualify for the purpose in hand”. Potentially, neuroimaging-derived brain-predicted age may be a proxy of underlying brain and systemic integrity during ageing.Fig. 3 Survival curves based on high and low brain-PAD at age approximately 73 years. Illustration of the relationship between brain-predicted age difference (brain-PAD) and survival over 8 years after MRI scanning at a mean age of 73 years in the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 [32]. Kaplan–Meier plot shows the survival curves for individuals grouped according to whether their brain-PAD was in the upper (red) or lower (blue) quartile of the distribution. Survival probably is observed to be lower for those with high brain-PAD. Crosses on the survival curves indicate age at last assessment (i.e., right censored data). These are for illustration only; the analyses were conducted with all-available participants’ data, and brain-PAD was entered as a continuous variable



Though initial data validating brain-predicted age as an ageing biomarker are promising, additional validation in other age-related contexts are needed to support its wider use in brain diseases. Brain-predicted age is under a degree of genetic influence [19], which motivates the search for relevant risk genes for poorer brain ageing. Brain-predicted age is reliable (intra-class correlation coefficient = 0.97 within scanner, 0.92 between scanner) [19], making it suitable for use in longitudinal studies predicting individual trajectories of brain health over time. Given suitable development, brain-predicted age may in future provide insights into overall biological ageing across the population (see Box 2).

Box 2 Seven future directions for brain-ageing research The overall goals of brain-ageing research are: (i) to understand how the brain changes as we age; (ii) to understand why the brain changes as we age; and (iii) to help improve brain health and reduce the impact of cognitive decline and neuropsychiatric diseases during ageing. To meet these goals, we have identified seven key future directions for the field:Characterise the spectrum of brain ageing. To better understand how the human brain changes with age, we need a clearer picture of the different possibilities. Efforts to define the population variability in brain structure and function across the life course and to build so-called normative models of brain ageing will be vital to define this spectrum of different possibilities. This will enable us to locate an individual within the spectrum of brain ageing and have a clearer idea of what constitutes the gradient between healthy and pathological ageing-related changes that may result from a neuropsychiatric disorder.

Continue to open up more, expertly curated, datasets. The number of large datasets becoming publicly-available is increasing, and the informatics necessary for processing and analysing these data to maximise their utility are also emerging. As even more biomedical data sharing occurs, it is essential that we further encourage comprehensive, scalable and extendable informatics platforms and standards. Efforts such as the Dementias Platform UK (https://www.dementiasplatform.uk/) and BRAINS Imagebank (http://www.brainsimagebank.ac.uk/) are underway to collate data from diverse sources [130]. Standardisation initiatives such as BIDS (Brain Imaging Data Structure: http://bids.neuroimaging.io) and analytic platforms such as Nipype (http://nipype.readthedocs.io) are gathering more traction in the community. Such efforts should allow sharing and combining of different datasets from diverse sources and will be particularly important as moves to open access to clinically acquired neuroimaging data gather momentum.

Externally validate brain-ageing models. Eminent statistician George Box said, “Essentially, all models are wrong, but some are useful”. For brain-ageing research, along with any other statistical modelling endeavour, it is essential that predictive models are validated in external datasets to demonstrate that they provide useful predictions. Merely showing reasonable within-sample accuracy is insufficient, particularly if framed around unilluminating prediction goals (e.g., classification of patients with manifest disease from healthy controls).

Identify individual spatial patterns of brain ageing. Currently, most brain-age research has taken a global approach, using either whole brain or total grey matter data to generate a single brain-predicted age value per individual. However, it is likely that differential spatial patterns of brain ageing occur within individuals, e.g., in the context of different diseases. Therefore, research aimed at developing individualised ‘saliency’ maps to better understand which parts of the brain are driving brain-age predictions or even voxelwise brain-predicted age images could be informative. Such research could be used to compare spatial patterns of brain ageing across different disease states, potentially distinguishing them or identifying within-disease subgroups, leading to new insights about the brain regions underlying healthy ageing or ageing-disease interactions.

Recognise the continuum of ageing and disease. Conventional wisdom states that health and disease are qualitatively different, and that ageing itself is not a disease. However, in the modern era of chronic disease and extended pre-manifest disease stages, this distinction needs to be reconsidered. Instead of measuring how healthy people and people with a disease differ, we need a conceptual shift, so we can better consider how ageing and disease processes are similar, and how they might interact to influence prognosis and treatment response in the case of neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases.

Integrate more closely with biogerontology. As we outline herein, evidence now suggests that, to gain a comprehensive understanding of ageing from a biological perspective, data from all-available sources needs be considered. Historically, the neuroscientific domain of brain ageing has been separated from that of biogerontology, where the brain is largely neglected. Given the importance of brain–body interactions for mediating a host of biological functions and behaviours, it essential that brain ageing and biogerontological research become more closely integrated, through collaboration and research capacity building, to the benefit of both.

Aim for greater clinical applicability. A greater focus on clinical and healthcare applications is needed to translate this growing knowledge of brain ageing to have practical utility. Given the ageing global population, the prevalence of chronic diseases that influence brain health, and the costs to society associated with cognitive decline and dementia, we urgently need to improve brain and body health as we age. Predictive models of brain and body ageing could be beneficial here. As indices of underlying biological ageing, they could serve as either a measurable risk factor for increased susceptibility to age-related health problems or a surrogate outcome measure of protective or deleterious effects of disease or interventions on the ageing brain. For example, in the context of clinical trial of a neuroprotective treatment in a neuropsychiatric disease, these measures could be used to stratifying enrolment, screening for people with higher biological age, under the assumption that they would be at greater risk for clinical decline over a shorter timeframe. Longitudinal changes to measures of biological age could also be used as outcomes in clinical trials, particularly in at-risk or prodromal groups where measuring clinical symptoms is challenging. Evidence that an intervention reduces biological age differences over time could suggest that a given intervention is beneficial to brain health. Finally, biological measures of brain and body have the potential be used in general clinical practice, to screen people and identify those at increased risk of poorer brain and body health as they age.



Brain ageing and disease
Ageing is a key risk factor for many major medical health problems, not least neurodegenerative diseases. Furthermore, even if ageing does not increase risk of a specific chronic disease, older age likely worsens disease symptoms and prognosis. This motivates research into how measures of biological ageing relate to disease risk or disease progression, and how diseases in turn can influence rates of biological ageing. In fact, a number of neurological and psychiatric diseases have been proposed to result in premature or accelerated ageing, based on clinical observations and behavioural or biological research. These include schizophrenia, depression, epilepsy, HIV infection, and traumatic brain injury [38–42]. Validating these ideas is currently difficult, as there is no consensus operationalised definition of an accelerated-ageing phenotype, making the concept controversial [43]. Nevertheless, neurodegeneration is one of the four key components of ageing proposed by Margolick & Ferruci [43]; therefore, models of brain ageing offer a possible window into the relationship between ageing and disease. If a disease can be shown to accelerate the ageing-related phenotype of brain structure, this provides information about the potential mechanisms involved and highlights possible commonalities across diagnostic categories. Importantly, it also enables the measurement of individual differences in disease groups, with prognostic implications for future brain health.

A number of psychiatric disorders have been investigated using brain-predicted age metrics (Table 1). In schizophrenia, reports have suggested that not only is greater brain ageing observed, particularly in males [24, 44], but that this accelerates over time [29]. In other psychotic conditions, such as bipolar disorder and at-risk mental states, increased brain ageing is less evident [24, 44]. Koutsourleris et al.'s comprehensive study also included patients diagnosed with major depressive disorder (MDD), finding a mean added brain ageing of 4 years [24]. Individuals with borderline personality disorder were studied, showing a mean added brain ageing of 3.1 years. These preliminary studies indicate that psychiatric disorders do indeed result in premature age-related changes to brain structure, though further validation in larger samples is required, such as that currently being undertaken by the ENIGMA-MDD consortium [45].Table 1 Studies of brain-predicted age in disease

Study	Clinical group	
N
	Age (mean ± SD, or range)	MRI features	Algorithm	Brain-PAD (mean, years)	
Psychiatric disorders	
  Franke et al. [21]	Alzheimer’s disease	102	76 ± 8	GM	RVR	10.0	
  Franke and Gaser [46]	MCI—stable	36	77 ± 6	GM	RVR	BL: −0.5 FU (3 yrs): −0.4	
MCI—progressive	112	74 ± 7	GM	RVR	BL: 6.2 FU (3 yrs): 9.0	
Alzheimer’s disease	150	75 ± 8	GM		BL: 6.7 FU (2 yrs): 9.0	
 Koutsouleris et al. [24]	High psychosis risk	89	25 ± 6	GM	SVR	1.7	
Schizophrenia	141	28 ± 12	GM	SVR	5.5	
Major depression	104	42 ± 8	GM	SVR	4.0	
  Gaser et al. [49]	MCI—progressive (early/late)	58/75	74 ± 7/75 ± 7	GM	RVR	8.7/5.6	
  Schnack et al. [29]	Schizophrenia	341	34 ± 12	GM	SVR	BL: 3.4 FU (4 yrs): 4.3	
  Löwe et al. [48]	MCI—stable (APOE ε4 carriers/non-carriers)	14/22	77 ± 6/77 ± 6	GM	RVR	BL: −0.9/−0.9 FU(3 yrs): 0.0/−0.6	
MCI—progressive (APOE ε4 carriers/non-carriers)	78/34	74 ± 6/75 ± 9	GM	RVR	BL: 5.8/5.5 FU (3 yrs): 8.7/7.3	
Alzheimer’s disease (APOE ε4 carriers/non-carriers)	101/49	74 ± 7/76 ± 9	GM	RVR	BL: 5.8/6.2 FU (2 yrs): 8.3/7.7	
  Nenadic et al. [44]	Bipolar disorder	22	38 ± 11	GM	SVR	−1.3	
Borderline personality disorder	57	26 ± 7	GM	SVR	3.1	
Schizophrenia	45	34 ± 10	GM	SVR	2.6	
  Li et al. [47]	Alzheimer’s disease	411	75 ± 7	Hippocampal volume	SVR	7.0	
  Varikuti et al. [66]	Alzheimer’s disease	163	56–91	GM	LASSO	8.5; 10.7a	
MCI	64	55–87	GM	LASSO	6.2; 5.4a	
  Kolenic et al. [131]	Psychosis (first episode)	120	27 ± 4.9	GM	RVR	2.6	
  Guggenmos et al. [132]	Alcohol dependence	119	20–65	GM	MLRR	4.0	
Neurological disorders	
  Cole et al. [52]	Traumatic brain injury	99	38 ± 12	GM/WM	GPR	4.7/6.0	
  Cole et al. [59]	HIV	162	57 ± 8	Whole brain	GPR	2.2	
  Cole et al. [133]	HIV	131	56 ± 6	Whole brain	GPR	BL: 1.6 FU (2 yrs): 1.6	
  Cole et al. [50]	Down’s syndrome	46	42 ± 9	Whole brain	GPR	2.5	
  Pardoe et al. [58]	Epilepsy (medically refractory/newly-diagnosed)	94/42	32 ± 14/31 ± 11	Whole brain	GPR	4.5/0.9	
  Liem et al. [53]	Objective cognitive impairment (mild/major)	632/251	58 ± 15/58 ± 16	Whole brain	SVR/RF	0.7/1.7	
Physiological disorders	
  Franke et al. [60]	Diabetes (type II)	98	65 ± 8	GM	RVR	4.6	
Diabetes (type II)—longitudinal	12	63 ± 7	GM	RVR	BL: 5.1 FU (4 yrs): 5.9	
  Ronan et al. [61]	Obesity	227	58 ± 17	WM	NLME	10.0	
  Franke et al. [134]	Gestational nutrient restriction (female/male)	22/19	67 ± 0.2/67 ± 0.1	GM	RVR	0.9/2.5	
BL baseline, FU follow-up, GM grey matter, GPR Gaussian process regression, LASSO Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator, MCI mild cognitive impairment, MLRR multi-linear ridge regression, NLME non-linear mixed effects model, RF random forests, RVR relevance vector regression, SVR support vector regression, WM white matter

aStudy included results from two different training datasets



The development of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and subsequent Alzheimer’s disease are some of the key pathological consequences of the brain-ageing process. Using neuroimaging, people diagnosed with Alzheimer’s have been shown to have greater apparent brain ageing, from various analyses using the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset [21, 46–48]. In people with MCI, brain-predicted age was a significant predictor of progression to dementia within three years of baseline MRI scan [46, 48, 49]. This is important as it demonstrates that brain-predicted age is sensitive to subtle underlying changes to the brain that occur prior to overt disease manifestation. In slowly progressive neurodegenerative conditions like Alzheimer’s, tools that identify people at greater risk of future morbidity could be particularly useful, both for clinical practice and for the design of clinical trials, either by stratifying trial enrolment or as a surrogate outcome measure. Some evidence also suggests that APOE genotype is associated with increased brain ageing in ADNI [48], with Alzheimer’s disease patients carrying the e4 allele showing greater longitudinal changes in brain-predicted age compared to non-e4 carriers. However, an APOE effect was not observed in people with DS nor in a general population sample [32, 50]. Whereas neuroimaging measures of brain ageing appear to be heritable [19], as would be expected given the demonstrated heritability of measures of brain volume [51], further research is necessary to conclusively identify specific genetic factors that influence rates of brain ageing.

An important consideration regarding the relevance of brain-predicted age for psychiatric diseases is the lack of specificity. The average ‘added’ brain-ageing is relatively similar across different disorders. The limits the use of brain-predicted age to differentially diagnose diseases or generate disease-specific insights into potential brain-structural mechanisms. An alternative application of brain-predicted age (or other ageing biomarkers) in the context of psychiatric diseases is to capture individual differences within disease groups, as the observed variability is often relatively high. For example, if within a group of patients with MDD some individuals show higher brain-PAD than others, these patients may have experienced greater severity of disease, resulting in greater downstream accumulation of age-related damage to the brain. They may also be at increased risk of subsequent general cognitive dysfunction, particularly given reports associating brain-predicted age with cognitive performance [32, 50, 52, 53]. As cognitive dysfunction is thought to relate to general functional ability in MDD [54] and a combination of MDD and cognitive decline may increase risk for dementia in older adults [55–57], then information about an individuals’ apparent brain ageing could be used to target treatments and interventions to those at greater risk.

Neurological conditions have also been assessed to establish their influence on brain ageing (Table 1). Increased brain ageing has been observed in survivors of a traumatic brain injury [52], in treatment-resistant epilepsy [58], and to a lesser extent, in adults with successfully treated HIV [59]. As with studies of people from the general population, these studies showed a moderate, but consistent relationship between brain-predicted age and cognitive performance, whereby individuals with older-appearing brains performed more poorly in a range of cognitive domains. So, although accentuated in certain disease conditions, it seems that measures of brain ageing are tapping into something more general that relates to brain health. Future research should follow these groups longitudinally to establish whether the apparent increases in brain ageing are stable or accelerating over time, and how this relates to cognitive outcomes.

Finally, the relationship between physiological health conditions without an explicit central nervous system (CNS) component and brain ageing has been explored. Both obesity and type II diabetes mellitus have been associated with higher brain-predicted age than chronological age [60, 61]. These studies reinforce two important points. Firstly, they support the idea that chronic systemic disorders have wide-ranging deleterious effects on the body, which includes affecting the brain, leading to increased accumulation of age-like changes. Secondly, technical developments in neuroimaging mean that we now have a robust and reliable measure of the adverse effects of these conditions during ageing. For example, in light of concerns over the chronic neurological consequences of obesity for an ageing society [62], brain-predicted age could be used to measure individual differences in how severely obesity impacts brain health. Of course, it will be useful to see future studies like these including other ageing biomarkers so that brain ageing can be compared with them in different contexts.

Whether or not ageing itself is a disease is a controversial topic [63]. Nevertheless, the growing body of literature investigating neuropsychiatric diseases from the perspective of brain ageing suggests that these diseases can accentuate some of the brain structural changes that occur in healthy ageing. However, it is important not to assume that the same effects are occurring in different conditions in which brain-predicted age is increased. There is scope to explore the spatial patterns underlying increased brain-predicted age in different diseases to determine any similarities between diseases. Multiple approaches to evaluating feature (e.g., voxel or brain region) importance in machine-learning models of neuroimaging data exist, including weight-vector mapping, sensitivity mapping and analytically approximated permutations [64, 65]. Recently, Varikuti et al. [66] used an orthonormal non-negative matrix factorisation approach combined with LASSO regression to determine which grey matter regions most influenced age prediction. They found that the majority of cortical and subcortical areas were involved in age prediction, suggesting much of the brain is affected by the ageing process. Interestingly, the exact spatial patterns of feature importance varied across prediction models, which had used different training datasets. This suggests that there are potentially multiple solutions to the problem of predicting age from volumetric MRI data, making it difficult to isolate a universal brain ageing ‘signature’. This motivates research into methods for identifying an individual’s spatial patterns of brain ageing (Box 2). This should enable examination of what factors relate to specific brain-ageing patterns, allowing better evaluation of whether different diseases can result in similar brain changes, along the ageing spectrum. If brain ageing is a global phenomenon [67], the brain’s interconnectedness could mean that similar global changes occur downstream as a result of spatially disparate initial insults, even in diseases with focal brain damage. This interconnectedness is not only at the level of brain structure and function, but also at molecular and cellular scales, with putative ‘molecular nexopathies’ [68], Wallerian degeneration and circulating immune factors (e.g., cytokines) providing potential mechanisms whereby local damage could precipitate global changes that, arguably, resemble those seen in ageing.

Importantly, measures of brain ageing in mild, prodromal disease stages can predict the progression to further cognitive decline and dementia. This implies that a more comprehensive picture of the disease process could be gained by combining more specific measures that reflect distinct pathologies with more general measures of the brain ageing process.

Bodily ageing biomarkers
The introduction of neuroscientific data into the search for ageing biomarkers is relatively recent. The majority of other research has focused on biochemical measures, often derived from blood samples, as recently reviewed by Jylhävä et al. [69]. Alongside biochemical measures, physiological measures of biological ageing have also shown considerable promise, representing the outward phenotypic manifestation of underlying age-related biological changes. Many potential ageing biomarkers have been proposed, and here we provide an overview of leading candidates. Our intention here is to sketch broadly the conceptual landscape in which brain ageing resides.

Telomere length and ageing
Telomeres are the nucleo-protein complexes present at the end of all eukaryotic chromosomes. As they shorten each time a somatic cell divides [70, 71], telomere length is often considered an ageing biomarker [72]. Telomere shortening, commonly measured in leukocytes, is associated with a number of environmental factors, including socio-economic status, smoking, oxidative stress, and psychological stress [73–75]. However, the correlation between telomere length and chronological age was shown to be about r = −0.3 in a systematic review [76], a weaker relationship with age than other candidates, such as the epigenetic clock, as highlighted by Jylhävä et al. [69].

Over recent years, an increasing body of evidence has suggested that telomere length predicts a small amount of variation in brain, cognitive, and other physiological functions and ageing. Shorter leukocyte telomere length has been linked to: subcortical atrophy (beta = −0.217) and white matter hyperintensities (WMHs) (telomeres of individuals with subcortical WMHs were 371 bp shorter) in a sample of 102 non-demented older individuals [77]; global and regional brain volume in a cohort of 1960 middle-aged individuals (betas = 0.04–0.08) [78]; hippocampal volume in 47 middle-aged women (R2 = 0.28–0.50) [79]. However, a meta-analysis of telomere length and hippocampal volume, including 2107 individuals, failed to find a significant association [80]. Such findings mean that the relationship between molecular senescence and brain structure remains unclear.

Individual cohort studies of the association between telomere length and cognitive ability have also proved equivocal. A meta-analysis of 12 European cohorts (N = 17,052, mean age = 59.2 ±8.8 years), which included Mendelian Randomisation to investigate causation, concluded that longer telomeres result in better cognitive performance, although not all findings withstood multiple testing correction or replication [81]. There are fewer studies that have investigated telomere length and longitudinal cognitive decline. However, our work with the Lothian Birth Cohorts from 1921 and 1936 allowed us to test this association [30]. These general population cohorts included a total N of ~1500 older individuals at baseline. We found that although both telomere length and cognitive ability decreased with age, they did so independently, and telomere length at baseline was not associated with cognitive decline [82]. However, a meta-analysis of 13 studies (860 patients and 2022 controls) found consistent evidence of shorter telomeres in Alzheimer’s disease patients (standardised mean difference = −0.984) [83].

Telomere length has also been suggested as a biomarker of other neuropsychiatric disorders including MDD, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. A meta-analysis of 14,827 individuals indicated that shorter telomere length is associated with a diagnosis of a psychiatric condition (Hedge’s g = −0.50) [84].

Shorter telomere length has repeatedly been associated with increased mortality, and in a large cohort study (N = 64,637) was associated with increased all-cause mortality (hazard ratio = 1.40), cancer mortality (hazard ratio = 1.52), and cardiovascular mortality (hazard ratio = 1.52) [85]. However, there is little evidence for telomere length as a biomarker of physical decline. Meta-analyses of a number of physical traits (walking and chair-rise speed, standing balance time, grip strength) with sample sizes ranging from 1217 to 3707 found only very weak associations between any of the measures and telomere length [86].

Currently, evidence clearly shows that telomere length declines with age and has some association with mortality and neuropsychiatric disorders. However, it is not a highly predictive biomarker of ageing, thus its use as a measure of biological age at an individual level is not well supported by available data.

DNA methylation and ageing
While the underlying genetic sequence remains stable over the life course, epigenetic marks, such as DNA methylation—the addition of a methyl group to a cytosine nucleotide in a cytosine–phosphate–guanine pair (CpG)—are dynamic and influenced by both genes and the environment. Microarray technology now enables analysis of methylation at upwards of 500,000 CpG sites across the genome. DNA methylation appears to vary with age, and thus methylation data have been used an ageing biomarker. DNA methylation patterns can be used to predict accurately an individual’s chronological age, as first shown by Hannum et al. [87], and by Horvath [11]; so-called ‘epigenetic clocks’. By using penalised regression methods, Hannum and colleagues derived a 71 CpG-site methylation signature based on 482 whole blood samples that correlated 0.91 with chronological age in 174 independent samples. Horvath derived a 353 CpG-site signature based on over 8000 samples from 51 tissue types to provide a multi-tissue predictor that correlated 0.96 with chronological age in independent samples. DNA methylation can be studied using DNA derived from any type of nuclear cell, and whereas the majority of extant research has used blood samples, DNA methylation age is not necessarily consistent across tissue types within an individual [11].

Recently, Horvath proposed updated versions of both the ‘Hannum’ and ‘Horvath’ clocks that incorporate additional information from age-associated white blood cell counts, which can be imputed from methylation array data [88]. Other, more parsimonious clocks have also been built, for example, a 3 CpG-site clock was derived from a pyrosequencing approach in place of array data [89]. There are also strong correlations (r > 0.9) with individual CpG sites and chronological age, such as cg16867657 in the ELOVL2 gene [90].

Typically, epigenetic epidemiology studies consider both the Hannum and Horvath versions of the epigenetic clock. The biomarker metric used in these studies has been dubbed ‘epigenetic age acceleration’ and is either the raw difference between an individual’s DNA-methylation-predicted age (akin to brain-PAD), or the residual from the regression of DNA-methylation-predicted age on chronological age.

Statistically significant associations between epigenetic age have been reported in a variety of contexts. These include our work on longevity, whereby having a 5-year increase in epigenetic age was associated with 21% increased mortality risk [91]. We also previously found that older epigenetic age was associated with poorer cognitive ability (standardised beta = −0.07), grip strength (standardised beta = −0.05), lung function (standardised beta = −0.06) and walking speed (standardised beta = 0.03) [92]. Other researchers have reported epigenetic age associations with obesity [93], HIV [94], Down’s syndrome [95], and Alzheimer’s disease pathology [96]. In all instances, a ‘faster running’ epigenetic clock—methylation age older than chronological age—was associated with poorer health and function. Men typically have higher epigenetic ages than women by around 1 year [11, 87]. The heritability of both Hannum and Horvath age acceleration is around 40% [91].

Finally, epigenetic outlier burden—the number of times an individual’s methylation levels are more than three times the inter-quartile range below or above the 25th or 75th percentile of a CpG in the population—has been shown to correlate with chronological age, whereby more outliers accumulate over time [97]. How this burden relates to epigenetic clock measures or a broad spectrum of age-associated measures is yet to be investigated.

Lipids biomarkers of ageing
Lipids are highly prevalent in the brain and are important constituents of cell membranes and also act as signalling molecules [98]. Recent advances in mass spectrometry mean that hundreds to thousands of lipids can now be measured in blood plasma or serum [98, 99]. Studies indicate that changes in lipid metabolism are detectable in Alzheimer’s patients and may predict subsequent cognitive decline, making them a promising biomarker for AD [100, 101]. Sphingolipids, which are particularly abundant in the brain, have been associated with variation in memory impairment (OR = 0.31) and brain white matter structure (betas = 0.17–15.7) in older non-demented individuals, suggesting that they may also be a biomarker of normal cognitive ageing [102, 103]. Lipidomics is in its infancy, but is a promising area of research which may lead to the development of reliable biomarkers for AD and normal cognitive ageing.

Protein glycosylation biomarkers of ageing
Protein structure, which is defined by DNA sequences, does not change with age. However, glycans are also important constituents of most proteins. They are the product of complex pathways that involve many different proteins and are encoded in complex dynamic networks of hundreds of genes. Glycosylation of proteins does change with age, explaining up to 58% of the variance in chronological age [104]. GlycanAge also correlates with a number of biochemical and physiological age-related measures (betas = 0.0002–2.97) [104].

Physiological measures of ageing
Alongside biomarkers measuring internal ageing-related processes, a number of external measures of physiological properties of the human body have been associated with ageing. These include measures of body composition (e.g., body-mass index [BMI], waist–hip ratio, bone mineral density, fat mass, muscle mass), and measures of physiological (e.g., blood pressure, heart rate, grip strength, lung capacity, walking speed) and sensory function (e.g., visual acuity, hearing, smell). Generally, these measures consistently show significant, but relatively moderate, correlations with chronological age in healthy people [105–110]. The common approach to measuring these physiological properties generates a univariate measure. The use of univariate measures to predict chronological age is limited by the wide variability often seen at any one age, even in healthy individuals. In this sense, they may be less suitable as precise ageing biomarkers compared to higher-dimensional alternatives (e.g., spatial data on brain structure, DNA methylation status across multiple CpG sites), which perhaps better capture patterns of variability across narrow age ranges. Nevertheless, measures of physiological function have been used to form composite predictive models of biological age. For example, a multivariate model of visual and auditory acuity, grip strength, peak expiratory flow, blood pressure, and BMI was shown to correlate with chronological age (r = 0.48) [111]. More recently, physiological measures have been combined with biochemical laboratory measures of biological age, as discussed below.

Interestingly, despite only showing moderate relationships with ageing, physiological measures have been shown to strongly relate to future health. Taking the example of grip strength, results consistently support the promise of this as a marker of general health, robustly relating to disability, morbidity and mortality [112–114]. This raises a fundamental question for biogerontology. Why attempt to measure biological age per se, when one can go more directly to important health outcomes? One answer to this question is that building predictors of the underlying ageing process using biomarkers might better help us understand the mechanisms involved, which in turn could lead to treatments and interventions to help improve health during ageing. However, to properly model cause and effects within the complex interplay of different ageing processes, integrating measures from multiple biological systems will be necessary (see Box 2).

Integrating measures of biological ageing
Given the evident complexity of the ageing process, it is unlikely that any single measure will be the optimal ageing biomarker. Furthermore, although there is some generality in overall biological ageing, there is also system specificity. This means that change in an individual biomarker may well not indicate increased risk of disease or functional decline [115]. Hence, research efforts have focused on identifying panels of healthy ageing biomarkers [116], to derive composite measures that combine an array of complementary measures of biological properties. This statistical approach often includes biochemical markers, including ‘omics data, with indices of body composition and physiological functioning, and is becoming increasingly popular [37, 117–122]. However, many of these approaches still lack specificity and fail to model the heterogeneity in the biological ageing process within an individual. This heterogeneity has been conceptualised as the ‘mosaic’ of ageing [123], whereby different systems, tissues or cells in a single individual could be undergoing ageing-related changes at different rates. In some senses, this is the antithesis of the common-cause hypothesis [124], which suggests that there is a single underlying factor driving the phenotypic manifestations of ageing. The truth may well lie somewhere between these two theories. While there is often some correlation between different age-related phenotypes [111, 124], this is not universal. In fact, DNA-methylation age predictions from different tissues within the same person are not identical [11]. Furthermore, our combined study of the epigenetic clock and brain-predicted age showed no correlation between blood-derived DNA-methylation age and brain-PAD (rho = 0.001). Whereas the absence of a correlation could be due to measurement error, and is not unequivocal evidence of no relationship, interestingly we observed that both DNA-methylation age and brain-PAD were independently related to mortality risk. Statistically, brain-PAD explained significantly more variance than DNA-methylation age (area under curve [AUC] = 0.66 vs. 0.59), although the most explanatory model combined both measures (AUC = 0.69). This suggests that epigenetic ageing in blood may not have a causal role in structural ageing in the brain, or vice versa, yet when individuals appear older on both counts, mortality risk is heightened.

Our interpretation is that differential ageing rates can occur within an individual. Importantly, alongside this, there are latent systemic mechanisms and bi-directional feedback loops at work [125], meaning that increased accumulation of age-related damage in one system may propagate to another. To better understand this, it will be essential to incorporate data from as many different biological systems as possible. However, judicious statistical approaches will be required to extract meaningful variance and limit the potentially exponential growth in the number of variables. These approaches will include feature selection and dimension reduction methods (e.g., feature importance metrics and principal component analysis, respectively). This will help ensure that dimensionality can be equated across modalities (e.g., when combining brain imaging data, ‘omics data, epigenetic data, and physiological data), so that undue weight is not placed on a single data source. Furthermore, incorporating latent factors and modelling their moderating or mediating influences (e.g., using structural equation modelling) will allow hypotheses regarding cause-and-effect in biological ageing to be tested, helping us understand whether abnormal ageing in one organ or tissue can drive ageing in others.

Some open question about ageing biomarkers remain. Firstly, what does accelerated ageing mean at different points over the life course? Our review has focused on adulthood, with the assumption that appearing biologically older is negative. The consequences of accelerated ageing during childhood-to-adulthood development, however, are unclear and warrant further study. Secondly, why use ageing biomarkers when one could directly relate more straightforward brain structural measure(s) to behaviour or health outcomes? In fact, our study of brain structure and mortality showed that measures of grey matter and cerebrospinal fluid volume were more strongly related to mortality than the brain-ageing biomarker, brain-PAD [32]. However, ageing biomarkers have potential utility that other measures do not. In addition to the rationale outline in Box 1, ageing biomarkers allow individuals to be placed in the context of a wider population, giving an idea of whether or not their brain, for example, is similar to what is typical for their age. It also allows some inference about trajectories to be made from cross-sectional data, whereby a higher brain-PAD after a brain injury, for example, suggests that a negative progressive process has been triggered by that injury [52]. Biological age also has the potential to be measured in younger adults, when the confounds of chronic disease are lower and the likelihood of successful strategies to reduce age-related morbidity is greater [119]. Finally, the unit of measurement of ageing biomarkers is intuitive and can summarise complex information in a comprehendible manner. For example, a patient may more easily understand the connotations of having an older-appearing brain or a faster-running epigenetic clock than they would being told that their brain is a specific number of mL in volume or that their CpG sites at specific genomic locations are differentially methylated. Only further studies can settle these open questions; however, research into the biology of ageing should be conducted mindful of these issues.

Conclusions
Over recent years, neuroimaging data have been increasingly used to model healthy brain ageing. These efforts have been conducted in parallel to, but rarely in combination with, research into ageing biomarkers derived from measures of blood chemistry, body composition, or physiological functioning. This neuroimaging research has shown that psychiatric and neurological diseases can influence the brain-ageing process, as can non-CNS conditions. Alongside this, neuroimaging measures of brain-predicted age can provide prognostic information about the progression of individuals to cognitive decline, dementia, and subsequent death. In our view, this suggests that some of the long-term downstream sequelae of different brain diseases may overlap with each other and with the changes to brain structure seen during ageing. Potentially, a shift towards a greater emphasis in research on measuring individual differences, rather than group-average characteristics, will provide better predictions for long-term health outcomes in brain diseases and more generally.

However, whereas neuroimaging studies of brain ageing are informative and potentially useful in a clinical setting, basic mechanistic studies should follow, to uncover the molecular and cellular processes driving these phenotypic alterations. This should help us better understand whether fundamentally age-related processes are occurring, or whether the commonalities between disease and ageing are in fact epiphenomena. Epiphenomena or not, the brain-predicted age measure appears to meet all the same criteria for an ageing biomarker as other measures, such as the epigenetic clock. Telomere length, despite its long-standing popularity, appears, in fact, to be less appropriate than brain-predicted age, either at predicting chronological age or health outcomes. The long-term goal of biogerontology should be to integrate the measurements of as many age-related epiphenomena as possible, using the growing array of biological measurement techniques available. It is notable that, in a number of recent reviews of ageing biomarkers, neuroimaging studies and in fact the brain in general, are overlooked [69, 126, 127]. To develop robust, reliable and valid ageing biomarkers that are truly integrative across the human biological system, it is time to blend biogerontology with neuroscience in efforts to understand and improve health during ageing.

Acknowledgements
The University of Edinburgh Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology supports IJD and SEH, and is funded by the MRC and BBSRC (Grant No. MR/K026992/1). Age UK (Disconnected Mind grant) and MRC (Grant No. MR/M01311/1) support the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936. JHC is supported by an MRC/UKRI Innovation Fellowship.

Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
==== Refs
References
1. Lopez-Otin C  Blasco MA  Partridge L  Serrano M  Kroemer G   The hallmarks of aging Cell 2013 153 1194 217 23746838 
2. Harman D   Aging: overview Ann N Y Acad Sci 2001 928 1 21 11795501 
3. Baker GT 3rd  Sprott RL   Biomarkers of aging Exp Gerontol 1988 23 223 39 3058488 
4. Terry RD  DeTeresa R  Hansen LA   Neocortical cell counts in normal human adult aging Ann Neurol 1987 21 530 9 3606042 
5. Fjell AM  Westlye LT  Grydeland H  Amlien I  Espeseth T  Reinvang I    Accelerating cortical thinning: unique to dementia or universal in aging? Cereb Cortex 2014 24 919 34 23236213 
6. Fotenos AF  Snyder AZ  Girton LE  Morris JC  Buckner RL   Normative estimates of cross-sectional and longitudinal brain volume decline in aging and AD Neurology 2005 64 1032 9 15781822 
7. Pelvig DP  Pakkenberg H  Stark AK  Pakkenberg B   Neocortical glial cell numbers in human brains Neurobiol Aging 2008 29 1754 62 17544173 
8. Marner L  Nyengaard JR  Tang Y  Pakkenberg B   Marked loss of myelinated nerve fibers in the human brain with age J Comp Neurol 2003 462 144 52 12794739 
9. Toescu EC   Normal brain ageing: Models and mechanisms Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 2005 360 2347 54 
10. Soreq L  Rose J  Soreq E  Hardy J  Trabzuni D  Cookson MR    Major Shifts in Glial Regional Identity Are a Transcriptional Hallmark of Human Brain Aging Cell Rep 2017 18 557 70 28076797 
11. Horvath Steve   DNA methylation age of human tissues and cell types Genome Biology 2013 14 10 R115 24138928 
12. Salthouse TA   Selective review of cognitive aging J Int Neuropsych Soc 2010 16 754 60 
13. Deary IJ  Corley J  Gow AJ  Harris SE  Houlihan LM  Marioni RE    Age-associated cognitive decline Br Med Bull 2009 92 135 52 19776035 
14. Steptoe A  Deaton A  Stone AA   Subjective wellbeing, health, and ageing Lancet 2015 385 640 8 25468152 
15. Lukaschek K, Vanajan A, Johar H, Weiland N, Ladwig KH. In the mood for ageing: Determinants of subjective well-being in older men and women of the population-based KORA-Age study. BMC Geriatr. 2017;17:126.
16. Ferrari Alize J.  Charlson Fiona J.  Norman Rosana E.  Patten Scott B.  Freedman Greg  Murray Christopher J.L.  Vos Theo  Whiteford Harvey A.   Burden of Depressive Disorders by Country, Sex, Age, and Year: Findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 PLoS Medicine 2013 10 11 e1001547 24223526 
17. Vos T  Flaxman AD  Naghavi M  Lozano R  Michaud C  Ezzati M    Years lived with disability (YLDs) for 1160 sequelae of 289 diseases and injuries 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 Lancet 2012 380 2163 96 23245607 
18. Brown T  Kuperman JoshuaM  Chung Y  Erhart M  McCabe C  Hagler DonaldJ Jr    Neuroanatomical assessment of biological maturity Curr Biol 2012 22 1693 8 22902750 
19. Cole JH  Poudel RPK  Tsagkrasoulis D  Caan MWA  Steves C  Spector TD    Predicting brain age with deep learning from raw imaging data results in a reliable and heritable biomarker Neuroimage 2017 163C 115 24 
20. Dosenbach NUF  Nardos B  Cohen AL  Fair DA  Power JD  Church JA    Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI Science 2010 329 1358 61 20829489 
21. Franke K  Ziegler G  Klöppel S  Gaser C   Estimating the age of healthy subjects from T1-weighted MRI scans using kernel methods: exploring the influence of various parameters Neuroimage 2010 50 883 92 20070949 
22. Habes M  Erus G  Toledo JB  Zhang T  Bryan N  Launer LJ    White matter hyperintensities and imaging patterns of brain ageing in the general population Brain 2016 139 Pt 4 1164 79 26912649 
23. Cole JH  Franke K   Predicting age using neuroimaging: innovative brain ageing biomarkers Trends Neurosci 2017 40 681 90 29074032 
24. Koutsouleris N  Davatzikos C  Borgwardt S  Gaser C  Bottlender R  Frodl T    Accelerated brain aging in schizophrenia and beyond: a neuroanatomical marker of psychiatric disorders Schizophr Bull 2013 40 1140 53 24126515 
25. Su Longfei  Wang Lubin  Hu Dewen   Predicting the Age of Healthy Adults from Structural MRI by Sparse Representation Intelligent Science and Intelligent Data Engineering 2013 Berlin, Heidelberg Springer Berlin Heidelberg 271 279 
26. Wang J  Li W  Miao W  Dai D  Hua J  He H   Age estimation using cortical surface pattern combining thickness with curvatures Med Biol Eng Comput 2014 52 331 41 24395657 
27. Kondo C, Ito K, Wu K, Sato K, Taki Y, Fukuda H, et al. An age estimation method using brain local features for T1-weighted images. In: 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC); 2015.
28. Ludwig FC  Smoke ME   The measurement of biological age Exp Aging Res 1980 6 497 522 7011818 
29. Schnack HG  Haren NEMv  Nieuwenhuis M  Pol HEH  Cahn W  Kahn RS   Accelerated brain aging in schizophrenia: a longitudinal pattern recognition study Am J Psychiat 2016 173 607 16 26917166 
30. Deary IJ  Gow AJ  Pattie A  Starr JM   Cohort profile: the Lothian Birth Cohorts of 1921 and 1936 Int J Epidemiol 2012 41 1576 84 22253310 
31. Deary IJ, Gow AJ, Taylor MD, Corley J, Brett C, Wilson V, et al. The Lothian Birth Cohort 1936: A study to examine influences on cognitive ageing from age 11 to age 70 and beyond. BMC Geriatr. 2007;7:28.
32. Cole J H  Ritchie S J  Bastin M E  Valdés Hernández M C  Muñoz Maniega S  Royle N  Corley J  Pattie A  Harris S E  Zhang Q  Wray N R  Redmond P  Marioni R E  Starr J M  Cox S R  Wardlaw J M  Sharp D J  Deary I J   Brain age predicts mortality Molecular Psychiatry 2017 23 5 1385 1392 28439103 
33. Hedden T  Gabrieli JDE   Insights into the ageing mind: a view from cognitive neuroscience Nat Rev Neurosci 2004 5 87 96 14735112 
34. Nakamura E  Tanaka S   Biological ages of adult men and women with Down’s syndrome and its changes with aging Mech Age Dev 1998 105 89 103 
35. Zigman WB   Atypical aging in down syndrome Dev Disabil Res Rev 2013 18 51 67 23949829 
36. Johnson TE   Recent results: biomarkers of aging Exp Gerontol 2006 41 1243 6 17071038 
37. Jackson SHD  Weale MR  Weale RA   Biological age—What is it and can it be measured? Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2003 36 103 15 12849085 
38. Kirkpatrick B  Messias E  Harvey PD  Fernandez-Egea E  Bowie CR   Is schizophrenia a syndrome of accelerated aging? Schizophr Bull 2008 34 1024 32 18156637 
39. Moretti L  Cristofori I  Weaver SM  Chau A  Portelli JN  Grafman J   Cognitive decline in older adults with a history of traumatic brain injury Lancet Neurol 2012 11 1103 12 23153408 
40. Pathai S  Bajillan H  Landay AL  High KP   Is HIV a model of accelerated or accentuated aging? J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2014 69 833 42 24158766 
41. Breuer LEM  Boon P  Bergmans JWM  Mess WH  Besseling RMH  de Louw A    Cognitive deterioration in adult epilepsy: -does accelerated cognitive ageing exist? Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2016 64 1 11 26900650 
42. Verhoeven JE  Revesz D  Epel ES  Lin J  Wolkowitz OM  Penninx BWJH   Major depressive disorder and accelerated cellular aging: results from a large psychiatric cohort study Mol Psychiatry 2014 19 895 901 24217256 
43. Margolick JB  Ferrucci L   Accelerating aging research: How can we measure the rate of biologic aging? Exp Gerontol 2015 64 Suppl C 78 80 25683017 
44. Nenadic I  Dietzek M  Langbein K  Sauer H  Gaser C   BrainAGE score indicates accelerated brain aging in schizophrenia, but not bipolar disorder Psychiatry Res 2017 266 86 89 
45. Schmaal L  Veltman DJ  Van Erp TGM  Smann PG  Frodl T  Jahanshad N    Subcortical brain alterations in major depressive disorder: findings from the ENIGMA Major Depressive Disorder working group Mol Psychiatry 2016 21 806 12 26122586 
46. Franke K  Gaser C   Longitudinal changes in individual BrainAGE in healthy aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease GeroPsych 2012 25 235 45 
47. Li Y  Liu Y  Wang P  Wang J  Xu S  Qiu M   Dependency criterion based brain pathological age estimation of Alzheimer’s disease patients with MR scans Biomed Eng Online 2017 16 50 28438167 
48. Löwe Luise Christine  Gaser Christian  Franke Katja   The Effect of the APOE Genotype on Individual BrainAGE in Normal Aging, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer’s Disease PLOS ONE 2016 11 7 e0157514 27410431 
49. Gaser Christian  Franke Katja  Klöppel Stefan  Koutsouleris Nikolaos  Sauer Heinrich   BrainAGE in Mild Cognitive Impaired Patients: Predicting the Conversion to Alzheimer’s Disease PLoS ONE 2013 8 6 e67346 23826273 
50. Cole JH  Annus T  Wilson LR  Remtulla R  Hong YT  Fryer TD    Brain-predicted age in Down syndrome is associated with β-amyloid deposition and cognitive decline Neurobiol Aging 2017 56 41 49 28482213 
51. Batouli SAH  Trollor JN  Wen W  Sachdev PS   The heritability of volumes of brain structures and its relationship to age: a review of twin and family studies Ageing Res Rev 2014 13 1 9 24211464 
52. Cole JH  Leech R  Sharp DJ  for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.  Prediction of BrainAGE suggests accelerated atrophy after traumatic brain injury Ann Neurol 2015 77 571 81 25623048 
53. Liem F  Varoquaux G  Kynast J  Beyer F  Kharabian Masouleh S  Huntenburg JM    Predicting brain-age from multimodal imaging data captures cognitive impairment Neuroimage 2017 148 179 88 27890805 
54. Lam RW  Kennedy SH  McIntyre RS  Khullar A   Cognitive dysfunction in major depressive disorder: effects on psychosocial functioning and implications for treatment Can J Psychiatry 2014 59 649 54 25702365 
55. Byers AL  Yaffe K   Depression and risk of developing dementia Nat Rev Neurol 2011 7 323 31 21537355 
56. Diniz BS  Butters MA  Albert SM  Dew MA  Reynolds Iii CF   Late-life depression and risk of vascular dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: Systematic review and meta-analysis of community-based cohort studies Br J Psychiatry 2013 202 329 35 23637108 
57. Panza F  Frisardi V  Capurso C  D’Introno A  Colacicco AM  Imbimbo BP    Late-Life depression, mild cognitive impairment, and dementia: Possible continuum? Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2010 18 98 116 20104067 
58. Pardoe HR  Cole JH  Blackmon K  Thesen T  Kuzniecky R   Structural brain changes in medically refractory focal epilepsy resemble premature brain aging Epilepsy Res 2017 133 28 32 28410487 
59. Cole JH  Underwood J  Caan MWA  De Francesco D  van Zoest RA  Leech R    Increased brain-predicted aging in treated HIV disease Neurology 2017 88 1349 57 28258081 
60. Franke K  Gaser C  Manor B  Novak V   Advanced brain age in older adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus Front Aging Neurosci 2013 5 90 24381557 
61. Ronan L  Alexander-Bloch AF  Wagstyl K  Farooqi S  Brayne C  Tyler LK    Obesity associated with increased brain age from midlife Neurobiol Aging 2016 47 63 70 27562529 
62. O’Brien PD  Hinder LM  Callaghan BC  Feldman EL   Neurological consequences of obesity Lancet Neurol 2017 16 465 77 28504110 
63. Gladyshev TV  Gladyshev VN   A disease or not a disease? Aging as a pathology Trends Mol Med 2016 22 995 6 27793599 
64. Gaonkar B  Davatzikos C   Analytic estimation of statistical significance maps for support vector machine based multi-variate image analysis and classification Neuroimage 2013 78 270 83 23583748 
65. Haufe S  Meinecke F  Görgen K  Dähne S  Haynes JD  Blankertz B    On the interpretation of weight vectors of linear models in multivariate neuroimaging Neuroimage 2014 87 96 110 24239590 
66. Varikuti DP  Genon S  Sotiras A  Schwender H  Hoffstaedter F  Patil KR    Evaluation of non-negative matrix factorization of grey matter in age prediction Neuroimage 2018 173 394 410 29518572 
67. Walhovd KB  Westlye LT  Amlien I  Espeseth T  Reinvang I  Raz N    Consistent neuroanatomical age-related volume differences across multiple samples Neurobiol Aging 2011 32 916 32 19570593 
68. Warren JD  Rohrer JD  Schott JM  Fox NC  Hardy J  Rossor MN   Molecular nexopathies: a new paradigm of neurodegenerative disease Trends Neurosci 2013 36 561 9 23876425 
69. Jylhävä J  Pedersen NL  Hägg S   Biological age predictors EBioMedicine 2017 21 29 36 28396265 
70. Harley CB  Futcher AB  Greider CW   Telomeres shorten during ageing of human fibroblasts Nature 1990 345 458 60 2342578 
71. Lindsey J  McGill NI  Lindsey LA  Green DK  Cooke HJ   In vivo loss of telomeric repeats with age in humans Mutat Res 1991 256 45 48 1944386 
72. von Zglinicki T  Martin-Ruiz CM   Telomeres as biomarkers for ageing and age-related diseases Curr Mol Med 2005 5 197 203 15974873 
73. Valdes AM  Andrew T  Gardner JP  Kimura M  Oelsner E  Cherkas LF    Obesity, cigarette smoking, and telomere length in women Lancet 2005 366 662 4 16112303 
74. von Zglinicki T   Oxidative stress shortens telomeres Trends Biochem Sci 2002 27 339 44 12114022 
75. Robertson T  Batty GD  Der G  Fenton C  Shiels PG  Benzeval M   Is socioeconomic status associated with biological aging as measured by telomere length? Epidemiol Rev 2013 35 98 111 23258416 
76. Muezzinler A  Zaineddin AK  Brenner H   A systematic review of leukocyte telomere length and age in adults Ageing Res Rev 2013 12 509 19 23333817 
77. Wikgren M  Karlsson T  Soderlund H  Nordin A  Roos G  Nilsson LG    Shorter telomere length is linked to brain atrophy and white matter hyperintensities Age Ageing 2014 43 212 7 24231584 
78. King KS  Kozlitina J  Rosenberg RN  Peshock RM  McColl RW  Garcia CK   Effect of leukocyte telomere length on total and regional brain volumes in a large population-based cohort JAMA Neurol 2014 71 1247 54 25090243 
79. Jacobs EG  Epel ES  Lin J  Blackburn EH  Rasgon NL   Relationship between leukocyte telomere length, telomerase activity, and hippocampal volume in early aging JAMA Neurol 2014 71 921 3 25023551 
80. Nilsonne G  Tamm S  Mansson KN  Akerstedt T  Lekander M   Leukocyte telomere length and hippocampus volume: a meta-analysis F1000Res 2015 4 1073 26674112 
81. Hagg S  Zhan Y  Karlsson R  Gerritsen L  Ploner A  van der Lee SJ    Short telomere length is associated with impaired cognitive performance in European ancestry cohorts Transl Psychiatry 2017 7 e1100 28418400 
82. Harris SE  Marioni RE  Martin-Ruiz C  Pattie A  Gow AJ  Cox SR    Longitudinal telomere length shortening and cognitive and physical decline in later life: The Lothian Birth Cohorts 1936 and 1921 Mech Ageing Dev 2016 154 43 48 26876762 
83. Forero DA  Gonzalez-Giraldo Y  Lopez-Quintero C  Castro-Vega LJ  Barreto GE  Perry G   Meta-analysis of telomere length in Alzheimer’s disease J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2016 71 1069 73 27091133 
84. Darrow SM  Verhoeven JE  Révész D  Lindqvist D  Penninx BWJH  Delucchi KL    The association between psychiatric disorders and telomere length: a meta-analysis involving 14,827 persons Psychosom Med 2016 78 776 87 27359174 
85. Rode L  Nordestgaard BG  Bojesen SE   Peripheral blood leukocyte telomere length and mortality among 64,637 individuals from the general population J Natl Cancer Inst 2015 107 djv074 25862531 
86. Gardner MP  Martin-Ruiz C  Cooper R  Hardy R  Sayer AA  Cooper C    Telomere length and physical performance at older ages: an individual participant meta-analysis PLoS One 2013 8 e69526 23922731 
87. Hannum G  Guinney J  Zhao L  Zhang L  Hughes G  Sadda S    Genome-wide methylation profiles reveal quantitative views of human aging rates Mol Cell 2013 49 359 67 23177740 
88. Chen BH  Marioni RE  Colicino E  Peters MJ  Ward-Caviness CK  Tsai PC    DNA methylation-based measures of biological age: Meta-analysis predicting time to death Aging 2016 8 1844 65 27690265 
89. Weidner CI  Lin Q  Koch CM  Eisele L  Beier F  Ziegler P    Aging of blood can be tracked by DNA methylation changes at just three CpG sites Genome Biol 2014 15 R24 24490752 
90. Garagnani P  Bacalini MG  Pirazzini C  Gori D  Giuliani C  Mari D    Methylation of ELOVL2 gene as a new epigenetic marker of age Aging Cell 2012 11 1132 4 23061750 
91. Marioni RE  Shah S  McRae AF  Chen BH  Colicino E  Harris SE    DNA methylation age of blood predicts all-cause mortality in later life Genome Biol 2015 16 25 25633388 
92. Marioni Riccardo E  Shah Sonia  McRae Allan F  Ritchie Stuart J  Muniz-Terrera Graciela  Harris Sarah E  Gibson Jude  Redmond Paul  Cox Simon R  Pattie Alison  Corley Janie  Taylor Adele  Murphy Lee  Starr John M  Horvath Steve  Visscher Peter M  Wray Naomi R  Deary Ian J   The epigenetic clock is correlated with physical and cognitive fitness in the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 International Journal of Epidemiology 2015 44 4 1388 1396 25617346 
93. Horvath S  Erhart W  Brosch M  Ammerpohl O  Von Schönfels W  Ahrens M    Obesity accelerates epigenetic aging of human liver Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014 111 15538 43 25313081 
94. Horvath S  Levine AJ   HIV-1 infection accelerates age according to the epigenetic clock J Infect Dis 2015 212 1563 73 25969563 
95. Horvath S  Garagnani P  Bacalini MG  Pirazzini C  Salvioli S  Gentilini D    Accelerated epigenetic aging in Down syndrome Aging Cell 2015 14 491 5 25678027 
96. Levine ME  Lu AT  Bennett DA  Horvath S   Epigenetic age of the pre-frontal cortex is associated with neuritic plaques, amyloid load, and Alzheimer’s disease related cognitive functioning Aging 2015 7 1198 211 26684672 
97. Gentilini D  Garagnani P  Pisoni S  Bacalini MG  Calzari L  Mari D    Stochastic epigenetic mutations (DNA methylation) increase exponentially in human aging and correlate with X chromosome inactivation skewing in females Aging 2015 7 568 76 26342808 
98. Brugger B   Lipidomics: analysis of the lipid composition of cells and subcellular organelles by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry Annu Rev Biochem 2014 83 79 98 24606142 
99. Köfeler HC  Fauland A  Rechberger GN  Trötzmüller M   Mass spectrometry based lipidomics: an overview of technological platforms Metabolites 2012 2 19 38 24957366 
100. Wong MW  Braidy N  Poljak A  Pickford R  Thambisetty M  Sachdev PS   Dysregulation of lipids in Alzheimer’s disease and their role as potential biomarkers Alzheimer’s Dement 2017 13 810 27 28242299 
101. Wong MW  Braidy N  Poljak A  Sachdev PS   The application of lipidomics to biomarker research and pathomechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease Curr Opin Psychiatry 2017 30 136 44 28002106 
102. Mielke MM  Bandaru VVR  Haughey NJ  Rabins PV  Lyketsos CG  Carlson MC   Serum sphingomyelins and ceramides are early predictors of memory impairment Neurobiol Aging 2010 31 17 24 18455839 
103. Gonzalez CE  Venkatraman VK  An Y  Landman BA  Davatzikos C  Ratnam Bandaru VV    Peripheral sphingolipids are associated with variation in white matter microstructure in older adults Neurobiol Aging 2016 43 156 63 27255825 
104. Krištić J  Vučković F  Menni C  Klarić L  Keser T  Beceheli I    Glycans are a novel biomarker of chronological and biological ages J Gerontol 2014 69 779 89 
105. Schimpl M  Moore C  Lederer C  Neuhaus A  Sambrook J  Danesh J    Association between walking speed and age in healthy, free-living individuals using mobile accelerometry—a cross-sectional study PLoS ONE 2011 6 e23299 21853107 
106. Massy-Westropp NM  Gill TK  Taylor AW  Bohannon RW  Hill CL   Hand grip strength: age and gender stratified normative data in a population-based study BMC Res Notes 2011 4 127 21492469 
107. Majumdar S  Genant HK  Grampp S  Newitt DC  Truong VH  Lin JC    Correlation of trabecular bone structure with age, bone mineral density, and osteoporotic status: in vivo studies in the distal radius using high resolution magnetic resonance imaging J Bone Miner Res 1997 12 111 8 9240733 
108. Baumgartner RN  Stauber PM  McHugh D  Koehler KM  Garry PJ   Cross-sectional age differences in body composition in persons 60+ years of age J Gerontol 1995 50A M307 16 
109. Franklin SS  Gustin Iv W  Wong ND  Larson MG  Weber MA  Kannel WB    Hemodynamic patterns of age-related changes in blood pressure: The Framingham heart study Circulation 1997 96 308 15 9236450 
110. Hofer SM  Berg S  Era P   Evaluating the interdependence of aging-related changes in visual and auditory acuity, balance, and cognitive functioning Psychol Aging 2003 18 285 305 12825777 
111. MacDonald SW  Dixon RA  Cohen AL  Hazlitt JE   Biological age and 12-year cognitive change in older adults: findings from the Victoria Longitudinal Study Gerontology 2004 50 64 81 14963373 
112. Leong DP  Teo KK  Rangarajan S  Lopez-Jaramillo P  Avezum A Jr  Orlandini A    Prognostic value of grip strength: findings from the Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) study Lancet 2015 386 266 73 25982160 
113. Rantanen T  Guralnik JM  Foley D  Masaki K  Leveille S  Curb JD    Midlife hand grip strength as a predictor of old age disability JAMA 1999 281 558 60 10022113 
114. Peterson MD  Duchowny K  Meng Q  Wang Y  Chen X  Zhao Y   Low normalized grip strength is a biomarker for cardiometabolic disease and physical disabilities among U.S. and Chinese adults J Gerontol 2017 72 1525 31 
115. Sebastiani P  Thyagarajan B  Sun F  Schupf N  Newman AB  Montano M    Biomarker signatures of aging Aging Cell 2017 16 329 38 28058805 
116. Lara J  Cooper R  Nissan J  Ginty AT  Khaw KT  Deary IJ    A proposed panel of biomarkers of healthy ageing BMC Med 2015 13 222 26373927 
117. Putin E  Mamoshina P  Aliper A  Korzinkin M  Moskalev A  Kolosov A    Deep biomarkers of human aging: application of deep neural networks to biomarker development Aging 2016 8 1021 33 27191382 
118. Klemera P  Doubal S   A new approach to the concept and computation of biological age Mech Ageing Dev 2006 127 240 8 16318865 
119. Belsky DW  Caspi A  Houts R  Cohen HJ  Corcoran DL  Danese A    Quantification of biological aging in young adults Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2015 112 E4104 10 26150497 
120. Levine ME   Modeling the rate of senescence: can estimated biological age predict mortality more accurately than chronological age? J Gerontol 2013 68 667 74 
121. Bürkle A  Moreno-Villanueva M  Bernhard J  Blasco M  Zondag G  Hoeijmakers JHJ    MARK-AGE biomarkers of ageing Mech Age Dev 2015 151 2 12 
122. Peterson MJ  Thompson DK  Pieper CF  Morey MC  Kraus VB  Kraus WE    A novel analytic technique to measure associations between circulating biomarkers and physical performance across the adult life span J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2016 71 196 202 25745025 
123. Cevenini E  Invidia L  Lescai F  Salvioli S  Tieri P  Castellani G    Human models of aging and longevity Expert Opin Biol Ther 2008 8 1393 405 18694357 
124. Christensen H  Mackinnon AJ  Korten A  Jorm AF   The “common cause hypothesis” of cognitive aging: Evidence for not only a common factor but also specific associations of age with vision and grip strength in a cross-sectional analysis Psychol Aging 2001 16 588 99 11766914 
125. Kirkwood TBL   Systems biology of ageing and longevity Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 2011 366 64 70 
126. Xia X  Chen W  McDermott J  Han JDJ   Molecular and phenotypic biomarkers of aging F1000Res 2017 6 860 28663789 
127. Wagner KH  Cameron-Smith D  Wessner B  Franzke B   Biomarkers of aging: from function to molecular biology Nutrients 2016 8 338 
128. Cole James H.   Neuroimaging-derived brain-age: an ageing biomarker? Aging 2017 9 8 1861 1862 28858849 
129. Sprott RL   Biomarkers of aging and disease: Introduction and definitions Exp Gerontol 2010 45 2 4 19651201 
130. Job DE  Dickie DA  Rodriguez D  Robson A  Danso S  Pernet C    A brain imaging repository of normal structural MRI across the life course: Brain Images of Normal Subjects (BRAINS) Neuroimage 2017 144 Pt B 299 304 26794641 
131. Kolenic M  Franke K  Hlinka J  Matejka M  Capkova J  Pausova Z    Obesity, dyslipidemia and brain age in first-episode psychosis J Psychiatr Res 2018 99 151 8 29454222 
132. Guggenmos M, Schmack K, Sekutowicz M, Garbusow M, Sebold M, Sommer C, et al. Quantitative neurobiological evidence for accelerated brain aging in alcohol dependence. Transl Psychiatry. 2017;7:1279.
133. Cole JH, Caan MWA, Underwood J, De Francesco D, van Zoest RA, Wit FWNM, et al. No evidence for accelerated aging-related brain pathology in treated AIDS: longitudinal neuroimaging results from the comorbidity in relation to AIDS (COBRA) Project. Clin Infect Dis. 2018;66:1899–1909.
134. Franke Katja  Gaser Christian  Roseboom Tessa J.  Schwab Matthias  de Rooij Susanne R.   Premature brain aging in humans exposed to maternal nutrient restriction during early gestation NeuroImage 2018 173 460 471 29074280

