
==== Front
Transcult PsychiatryTranscult PsychiatryTPSsptpsTranscultural Psychiatry1363-46151461-7471SAGE Publications Sage UK: London, England 10.1177/136346151985034510.1177_1363461519850345ArticlesCross-cultural adaptation of the Arabic Positive and Negative
Syndrome Scale in schizophrenia: Qualitative analysis of a focus
group Amro Iman Weill Cornell Medicine – QatarGhuloum Suhaila Rumailah Hospital, QatarMahfoud Ziyad Weill Cornell Medicine – QatarOpler Mark CSO-Prophase LLC, USAKhan Anzalee NeuroCog Trials, USA; Nathan S. Kline
Institute for Psychiatric Research, USAHammoudeh Samer Weill Cornell Medicine – QatarHani Yahya Rumailah Hospital, QatarYehya Arij Weill Cornell Medicine – Qatarhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6358-1541Al-Amin Hassen Weill Cornell Medicine – QatarHassen Al-Amin, Weill Cornell
Medicine – Qatar, Education City, PO Box 24144, Doha, Qatar. Email:
haa2019@qatar-med.cornell.edu27 5 2019 10 2019 56 5 973 991 © The Author(s) 20192019McGill
UniversityThis article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
which permits any use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages
(https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).As part of a project to translate and validate scales used in the
diagnosis and treatment of Arab patients with schizophrenia, this
study aimed to explore the experience of clinical research
coordinators (CRCs) while administering the Arabic version of the
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) on Arab schizophrenia
patients. We previously reported that the Arabic version of PANSS is a
valid and reliable tool to assess Arab patients with schizophrenia.
Five CRCs and the principal investigator attended focus group
discussions on cultural issues in administering the PANSS. A thematic
analysis approach was utilized for data coding and analysis. The
results identified issues related to the translation of the
instrument, the structure of the interview, the cultural sensitivity
of some questions, and the procedures for rating items of the PANSS.
Qualitative analysis also identified four main themes relevant to
clinical assessment of patients from Middle Eastern cultures:
religion, beliefs and values, gender, and semantic expressions. In
conclusion, researchers or clinicians administering the PANSS scale
interview in Arabic should be trained to consider the roles of local
dialects, familiarity with abstract thinking, religion, and social
constructs when assessing psychosis.

Arabic translationcultural validityfocus groupPANSSpsychiatric assessmentpsychosisQatar National Research Fundhttps://doi.org/10.13039/100008982NPRP 4-268-3-086
==== Body
Introduction
Schizophrenia is a chronic mental illness characterized by
positive symptoms (such as hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized
thinking), negative symptoms (like avolition, alogia, affect flattening, and
lack of motivation), and cognitive deficits in working memory, verbal
skills, and attention. The lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia is 0.4–1% of
the populations worldwide, but there are regional, cultural, and racial
variations (Jablensky
et al., 1992; Kirkbride et al., 2006, 2007; Picchioni & Murray
2007). The few studies that have assessed the prevalence of
schizophrenia in the Arab countries have found that the rates are similar to
those reported in other populations around the world (Abou-Saleh, Ghubash, & Daradkeh,
2001; Ghuloum, Bener, & Abou-Saleh, 2011; Karam et al., 2006).
Schizophrenia is usually diagnosed after a clinical interview and based on
the International Statistical Classification of Disease and related health
problems (ICD-10; WHO,
2010) or the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) of mental
disorders (American
Psychiatric Association, 2000), which are based on field
studies and expert opinions. These studies were conducted mainly in Western
countries like the USA and Europe. Such diagnostic interviews like the
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-SCID (First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams,
2002) and the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview for
Schizophrenia and other Psychotic Disorders-MINI (MINI-6; Amorim, Lecrubier,
Weiller, Hergueta, & Sheehan, 1998) are mostly used in
research to minimize clinician bias. The MINI has been translated and tested
within the Arabic context (Ghanem, Gadallah, Meky, Mourad, & El
Kholy, 2009; Kadri et al., 2005) and it
follows the DSM, fourth edition, text revision (DSM-IV-TR) criteria (American Psychiatric
Association, 2000) to confirm the diagnosis through a
semi-structured interview.

Other psychiatric scales assess the severity of psychosis and can be used to
monitor the effectiveness of the treatment. Examples of these tools include
the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) (Overall & Gorham, 1962) and
the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) (Kay, Fiszbein, & Opler,
1987). PANSS is a standardized instrument to assess symptom severity
in schizophrenia and is widely used in clinical research across various
regions and cultures. It includes 30 items that generate a total severity
score and three subscales of mutually exclusive items measuring positive
symptoms, negative symptoms, and general psychopathology, including anxiety,
depression, insight, etc. The PANSS ratings are based on the Structured
Clinical Interview for the PANSS (SCI-PANSS). Since its publication in 1987,
PANSS has been translated into more than 30 official languages (Opler & Ramirez,
1998). Recently, we quantitatively validated the Arabic version
of PANSS in Arabs with schizophrenia (Yehya et al., 2016, 2017).

Earlier studies have suggested that schizophrenia may be viewed in very similar
ways in many cultures and that the degree of the similarity in symptoms and
recognition of illness across cultures increases with disease severity
(White,
1982). On the other hand, the measurement of symptoms
associated with schizophrenia has been criticized for the lack of attention
to cultural variation (Bhui et al., 2003). For example, studies comparing the
manifestations of schizophrenia in different cultures (Jablensky et al., 1992; Sartorius et al.,
1986) have reported that in Western countries, schizophrenia
patients showed higher frequency of depressive symptoms, primary delusions,
and thought insertion and broadcasting, while in non-Western countries, they
showed more visual and directed auditory hallucinations. There is also
evidence that inadequate translation and adaptation of an instrument can
affect scale reliability (Berkanovic, 1980; Zandi, Havenaar, Laan,
Kahn, & Brink, 2016). There are well-established protocols
for the translation and cross-cultural adaptation of mental health
instruments to ensure semantic, conceptual, and technical equivalence
between the original and adapted versions (Simonsen & Mortensen, 1990).
Qualitative research methods can be used to explore the self-perception of
symptoms and social phenomena to establish cross-cultural equivalence (Malterud,
2001).

This study explored the experiences of clinical research coordinators (CRCs)
involved in administering the PANSS using qualitative thematic analysis
after focus group discussions. The main themes and challenges faced by the
CRCs during the validation project were categorized and analyzed, together
with the approaches utilized to address them.

Methods
Study design
This is a qualitative research study that was part of the project to
translate, culturally adapt, and validate the Arabic version of PANSS
in patients with schizophrenia in Qatar. This study adopted the
qualitative approach using focus group discussions. This method is
well known for the flexibility it provides in exploring the
participants’ experience (Miles & Huberman,
1994). Furthermore, focus group discussions have proved to be
useful in mental health research, by providing qualitative information
for both qualitative and quantitative research designs (Room, Janca,
Bennett, Schmidt, & Sartorius, 1996).

Study setting
Qatar is one of the six countries that belong to the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) in the Arabian Peninsula. It is a rapidly growing state
that includes immigrants from different nationalities and cultures.
The total population in Qatar is estimated to be about 2.5 million, of
which over 2 million are expatriates. The Arabs, including Qataris,
who are the most settled group in Qatar, represent about 27% of the
total population: 12.3% are Qataris, and 14.7% are Arabs from
different nationalities (Qatar Statistics Authority,
2015). This project was conducted between February 2013
and November 2014, and was a collaborative effort between the
Department of Psychiatry at Rumailah Hospital, Hamad Medical
Corporation (HMC) in Qatar and Weill Cornell Medicine – Qatar. The
study protocol was approved by the IRB committees of both institutions
(Protocol number: 11129/11; Research number: NPRP 4-268-3-086) and was
funded by the Qatar National Research Fund (QNRF). The target
population for the validation project was Arab schizophrenia patients
attending the Psychiatry Department. The latter is the only
psychiatric facility in Qatar. It has 10 outpatient clinics with about
120 visits per weekday, and four inpatient wards (70 beds) with 90–95%
occupancy. The majority of the inpatients are admitted with acute
psychotic symptoms, and about 25% of the outpatients have the
diagnosis of schizophrenia.

A previously published paper provides details on the quantitative study
for which the PANSS was translated (Yehya et al., 2016).
Briefly, the original PANSS was translated to Arabic using the
back-translation method for cross-cultural adaptation of psychiatric
scales (Prince,
2008). Three bilingual psychiatrists and two professional
translators were involved in this translation procedure. During this
adaptation process, the feedback from a pilot sample (10 schizophrenia
subjects and 10 normal controls) was also incorporated to prepare the
final Arabic version. The feedback of the CRCs (described below) was
also integrated into the translation and training for the
administration of PANSS to Arab patients. The copyright holder (Multi
Health Systems Inc., Ontario, Canada) of PANSS approved the final
version of the English back-translation of PANSS. The Arabic version
of the MINI-6 for schizophrenia module K (Amorim et al., 1998) was
used to confirm the diagnosis of schizophrenia in the eligible
subjects involved in the study, which included 101 Arab patients
diagnosed with schizophrenia and 98 Arabs with no mental
disorders.

Focus group participants
Five clinical research coordinators (CRCs) who were involved in the
recruitment process, and the study moderator who is the principal
investigator for the validation project, met to explore their
experiences in a focus group. This meeting was semi-structured and
chaired by the moderator. All participants were bilingual English and
Arabic speakers of different Arabic dialects. They had diverse
health/medical backgrounds (medical doctors, psychologist, nursing,
and other health professionals), with varied experience in mental
health research.

The participants were all trained in the administration of PANSS and
attended an intensive training course held by the PANSS Institute. The
participants were also trained to use the MINI-6 by Dr. Sheehan and
other psychiatrists on the research team. All the CRCs were supervised
on at least five cases before they started assessing subjects on their
own. These focus group discussions were held after each of the CRCs
had conducted at least 20 assessments with the Arabic PANSS. The group
participants knew each other well and had worked together on this
project for several months before these focus group discussions. The
focus groups were part of the translation and training procedures for
collecting the data for the quantitative analysis and they were
approved as part of the overall research proposal and did not require
a separate consent process.

Focus group discussions
The CRCs were invited to take part in two focus group discussions; each
session lasted approximately 90 minutes. Both languages (Arabic and
English) were used during the discussions, which were audio-recorded
and transcribed by the first author. Semi-structured discussions using
prompts were employed to elicit the insight and experiences of the
CRCs about the PANSS scale administration and the challenges they
faced. Examples of the questions utilized by the moderator are listed
in Appendix I. These questions and others were generated by the
moderator and the other bilingual practicing psychiatrists who were
involved in the translation and validation of the Arabic version of
PANSS. Particular attention was paid to determine whether there were
domains that should be added to, removed from, or modified in the
Arabic version of the scale. The moderator encouraged the CRCs to
elaborate on issues that had an impact on the process of scale
administration and ratings. They were also invited to describe
scenarios from the clinical practice where translation or cultural
issues were raised when administering the PANSS.

Data analysis
A thematic analysis approach was utilized to categorize the emerging
themes, supported by quotes taken from the focus group discussions.
The following six steps were followed for this thematic analysis: 1)
all transcribed materials and recordings were revised and revisited
many times to understand the data and note the preliminary ideas; 2)
the transcripts were read through to get a general flow of the
material as a whole, and then initial observations from the dataset
were coded; 3) the initial comments and codes were analyzed to
identify the possible organizations of the themes and subthemes; 4)
whenever ideas shared the same concept, they were allocated to the
same theme and potential subthemes. At this stage, we were able to
refine the analysis and organize the thematic chart, which led to
sub-themes being identified and fed back into the main themes; 5) the
organized themes and subthemes were then defined according to the
overall understanding of their cultural significance; 6) in the last
phase, the emerging themes and subthemes were supported by quotes from
the participants and divided according to their relevance to the goals
of this research study. The thematic analysis approach adopted here
allowed us to identify items that were not well understood or were
misinterpreted from the scale’s original intent. The first author
carried out the analyses under the supervision of the principal
investigator and the biostatistician in the team, and all data were
anonymous and treated confidentially. In order to support
confirmability and reduce bias, the data analysis involved research
members who did not participate in the translation or in the focus
group discussions. The credibility of this analysis was enhanced by
including feedback from the pilot study on 10 patients and 10 healthy
controls from the staff at the department.

Results
The results section is divided into two parts: 1) general observations and
findings of the SCI-PANSS and the rating criteria; and 2) cultural themes
that emerged from the focus group discussions on the assessment
processes.

PANSS interview and rating
The CRCs elaborated extensively on the details related to the SCI
interview and the PANSS criteria for rating. Table 1 presents the main
relevant areas of discussion. All CRCs agreed that although training
and practice helped them to process and deal with these issues, many
of these matters still had to be approached individually throughout
the study. The CRCs agreed that the formal Arabic translation of PANSS
is not always commensurate with the different Arabic dialects. For
example, the official Arabic word for “delusion” in not commonly used
in daily language. Frequently, they adjusted the dialogue during the
interview, taking into consideration the patients’ knowledge and
understanding, the local culture, education level, mental illness
perception, and Arabic dialect used. Adjusting and replacing certain
terms is something that the CRCs used to do instantly while
interviewing the subjects. This issue was difficult to manage during
the proverbs section of the PANSS where most of the proverbs (when
translated exactly) were not very well known to patients. Thus, to fit
with the subjects’ culture many of the sayings listed in PANSS were
changed in the Arabic translations and interview, with equivalent
local phrases corresponding to the four levels of difficulty as per
Appendix B of the original SCI-PANSS. For example, the proverb
“Carrying a chip on your shoulder” was replaced with “Coming with
trouble on his face,” which in local Arabic dialect reflects the same
meaning. During the early stages of the study, the CRCs questioned the
importance of the instructions and introductory paragraph of the
SCI-PANSS, wondering if this is essential for the rating of psychosis.
They also discussed the concept of structured vs. semi-structured
technique when interviewing the subjects and whether they should be
very strict when administering the questions of the SCI-PANSS. They
also agreed that there was overlap or repetition in some of the
questions, such as the example presented in Table 1, since both
questions ask the same thing. However, one CRC indicated that
“Question 14 comes under the delusions section while 126 comes under
grandiosity section …” which might indicate different processes of
thinking. Table 1. Issues related to the PANSS interview and ratings.

Issues	Illustrative quotes from focus group
participants	
Language and translation issues	“Lots of sub-cultural terms are presented in
the proverbs section … sometimes we don’t know
whether the difficulty in understanding is because
of the abstract way of thinking or the patient
can’t understand what the proverb means … as most
of them are difficult …” Another CRC suggested
that “… sometimes I ask the patient to give us one
proverb from their culture that he knows and
explain it to us …” which is often difficult for
patients to do.	
Introductory/instruction part	“… Usually, I skip this part of the
introduction and the instruction as I have started
talking to the patient earlier when introducing
the study, and we’ve already built the
rapport …”	
Structured vs. semi- structured
interviews	“… I’ve noticed something about the
SCI … within each group of questions there is a
clear flow … but within each section there is
not … you feel each question presents a different
idea … for instance, you ask about the date to
check the orientation, and after that you ask
something different …”	
Overlapping and repetitive questions	All CRCs agreed that there is some overlap in
many of the questions, and it is not very clear
when administering the scale. For instance:
“… What is the difference between Question 14 and
Question 126 in the SCI-PANSS …?” Question 14:
“Can you read other people’s minds?” Question 126:
“Do you have extrasensory perceptions (ESP), or
can you read other people’s minds?”	
Rating criteria	CRCs agreed “… reading all the potential
answers made it easier to rate … sometimes I skip
this step, as I became more familiar with the
scale and the rating criteria …”	
Sensitive questions	The group highlighted that all questions from
136 to 142 in the SCI-PANSS “are considered
culturally not appropriate” as these questions
pertain to religion. One CRC said that “… All
these are related to religious beliefs, especially
the one asking … perhaps you consider yourself
God … this is considered a taboo in the Arab
culture and Muslim community …”	


Several prompts about the rating criteria were presented during the
discussion. For example, “Do the evaluation criteria and the scores of
1 to 7 make sense to you? Do you always need to read all the options
before you rate or is it easier to focus on two ratings each time?”
The CRCs agreed that, at the beginning, reading all the potential
answers made it easier to rate. However, with time, they were able to
skip this step, as they became more familiar with the scale and the
rating criteria. The number of items to read before finalizing the
score was always dependent on each case and the complexities of the
history and psychiatric manifestations. Another issue related to the
interview is how to present the questions on culturally sensitive
issues like religion, sex, etc. All CRCs agreed that these always
needed to be introduced properly during the interview, otherwise
“subjects might feel offended.” One CRC indicated that some of the
subjects answered the culturally sensitive questions smoothly without
any problems, especially the one about being a prophet because the
patient was grandiose.

Specific cultural themes
The four main cultural themes extracted from the analysis of the focus
group discussions were religion, local faith and values, gender, and
semantic constructs. Table 2 presents the topics
with the corresponding illustrations. These themes and subthemes were
supported by the discussions of the focus group, but only a sample of
the main representative quotes is listed in the table. Table 2. Cultural themes and illustrative quotes from focus
group participants.

Themes	Sub-themes	Quotes	
Religion	Talking about God Asking about suicide Having
special powers	“In Arab culture I find talking about being
God means that you are talking religious taboos …”
“Some patients will give you that shocked
face … Like how do you even ask me this kind of
question, and they say it in different ways,
verbally or emotionally …”	
Beliefs	Delusions or possessions Strange or unusual
experiences	“In the Arab community, they are still
convinced that psychiatric illness [madness] is
still somehow related to Jinn and most of the
patients went to see the Motawwa [healer], so the
latter can deal with the Jinn or magic before they
come to the hospital …”	
Gender	Male-dominant culture Segregation between
males and females The unfortunate female being
mentally ill	“I came across more than one female patient
who refused to be recruited by a male research
coordinator …” “Some of the female patients don’t
follow up with their appointments, and they are
struggling somehow because of the social
stigma …”	
Semantics	Words and proverbs that are not very familiar
in Arabic dialects Concepts that have no synonyms
in the Arabic language and local culture Rating
criteria and the intended meaning of certain
terms	“The words mayor and governor are not used in
the Arabic language and are culturally not
applicable …” “The word hallucination is used and
understandable in Arabic but not delusions, which
makes it very difficult for us as clinical
researchers to explain it and make the effort to
use familiar words that are easy and used within
the patient’s dialect and accent …” “As we all
come from different backgrounds, speaking
different Arabic dialects, standardizing the way
people talk will help; I mean to standardize in
our head the way that we have to explain the
question and proceed with the patients’
assessment …” “We don't use the Arabic word to
reflect depression; instead, we always describe
the state of depression by using somatic terms to
explain the state or express what we feel …”	


Religion
Qatar is an Arabic country where Islamic religion is the central
pillar of cultural, social, and even governmental principles.
The CRCs agreed that some of the questions in the PANSS might be
“culturally sensitive” and need to be adapted to the local
culture, particularly those related to religion. They also
discussed the effect of the religious beliefs on the subjects’
views of the illness, its course, and outcome. For instance,
when asking the subjects whether they believed in God or
consider themselves prophets, both subjects and CRCs felt
uncomfortable; and such questions were met with resistance as if
they were unacceptable. The CRCs noted that most patients
reacted negatively and at times even refused any question that
might increase their “bad deeds,” just because it’s “haram”
(religiously forbidden) according to the faith of most Muslims.
As discussed above, the CRCs agreed that tactfully introducing
the questions related to religion as routine questions that are
asked to all patients generally helped in easing the
apprehension of the subjects interviewed and facilitated getting
adequate responses from patients.

Faiths and values
It is well documented that Arabs firmly believe in the existence of
supernatural forces such as “Jinn,” magic, and the evil eye. The
CRCs elaborated on certain values amongst the participants that
can have a significant impact on the delivery of PANSS. For
instance, it is evident that most of the Arab communities are
convinced that:… Psychiatric illness is still somehow related to Jinn,
and most of the patients would go to see the
“Motawwa” [local healer] or other traditional
healers to perform certain rituals and exorcise
Jinn … if this repeatedly fails then families of
patients would seek medical or psychiatric
help …

Another example: “most of our patients have used
the cultural rituals at some point, including the amulet writers
who produce amulets to avoid the evil eye, before they seek
professional help.” All group members noted that patients always
attribute all their symptoms to spiritual values and that the
evil eye has an effect on the way they think and behave in their
normal daily lives. These shared values made it difficult to
decide when such thoughts and behaviors are part of their
cultural norms or are related to their psychotic features. The
CRCs added that the training and initial supervision helped them
in deciding the proper rating of the PANSS items where the
scores have a wide range from 1 (absent) to 7 (extreme) while
taking the cultural context into consideration.

Gender
Gender and social differences in how the patients perceive the
cause of mental illness, as well as the way they deal, cope
with, and treat it, have been observed by the CRCs. For example,
compared to men, it is more common among female patients to cite
the possession of “Jinn” and the evil eye as the cause of the
illness, and generally they are always the first to seek help
from traditional healers. The CRCs also observed that most
female patients refused to be recruited by a male CRC, and, to a
lesser extent, male patients also refused to be enrolled by a
female CRC. The CRCs also noted that families tend to shield
women more and to not bring them for treatment or proper
assessment because, in Arabic culture, women are “the less
fortunate,” and for them to be diagnosed with psychiatric
illness means they will suffer more from social stigma for the
rest of their lives. The CRCs were concerned that the
aforementioned issues might affect the recruitment of females,
the evaluations of the caregivers, and the reports of patients
themselves, which ultimately might affect the ratings of the
PANSS items. In fact, we had more males with schizophrenia in
the quantitative study of PANSS (Yehya et al.,
2016).

Semantic construct
One of the prominent themes that emerged in this study was the
formal translation of the scale and the different Arabic
dialects used by the CRCs and patients. Although the formal
Arabic language is the official language in all Arab countries,
we know that each country has its subculture and its own daily
spoken dialect of Arabic. The formal language is commonly used
in official settings. The differences in spoken dialect,
communication methods, and presentation of psychiatric symptoms
might also impact the administration and the ratings of this
scale. Similarly, it was debated amongst the group whether
Arabic language translation has captured some of the English
concepts in the scale or not. For instance, when translating
delusion and depression into the Arabic language, CRCs tend to
use somatic terms to explain the state of it. Furthermore, the
word “madness” is used to reflect that one patient has a
psychiatric illness, without specifying any medical terminology
to indicate the type of mental illness: “We do explain the state
of mania without saying a term to reflect mania in Arabic …”
Also, there are Arabic words that have different meanings based
on the dialect spoken in each country. For example, the Egyptian
dialect is entirely distinct from the one spoken in the GCC
countries: “One day I observed one of my colleagues, there was a
clear miscommunication, caused by the different dialects between
her and the patient …”

All the CRCs were trained on using the English version of PANSS as
well as the Arabic one. It was obvious that they preferred to
use the English language when rating the PANSS. Consequently,
this affected the scale administration, especially with respect
to how to capture the intended meanings of certain terms and
whether they are available in the Arabic language or not. As one
CRC put it, “I think in English, ask in Arabic, then I will
translate what the patient said, and then I rate …”

Discussion
The aim of this qualitative study was to explore and identify the main
socio-cultural themes encountered during the administration and rating of
the Arabic PANSS. The first set of issues is related to the SCI-PANSS
interview: formal Arabic vs. local dialects, developing a rapport with
psychotic patients, the structure of the interview, understanding what
appear to be repetitive inquiries, introducing sensitive questions, and the
rating process (Table
1). The second set of themes is mostly inherent in the Arabic
culture of the Middle East and North Africa (MENA): general
religious/cultural beliefs, gender issues, and the variations in the Arabic
constructs of the psychopathology in schizophrenia (Table 2). Most of the matters in
the first set are usually related to the experience of CRCs and can be
addressed adequately with proper training and supervision. These matters are
essential during the processes of cultural adaptation, as they might affect
the ratings and thus compromise the reliability and validity of PANSS across
cultures. These measures were very comparable between the Arabic PANSS and
the other versions of PANSS (Hallit, Obeid, Haddad, Kazour, &
Kazour, 2017; Yehya et al., 2016, 2017). The
following sections will focus mainly on the cultural themes.

Previous studies that explored the cultural issues in mental health in the Arab
region reported that it is common for people to believe in supernatural
possession—Jinn, the evil eye, and sorcery (Al-Krenawi & Graham, 1997;
Al-Krenawi, Graham,
& Kandah, 2000)—and many believe that these are the causes
behind mental illness. The existence of supernatural forces has been
mentioned in the Quran (the Holy book of Islam), and some Arabs firmly
believe that these forces can be the cause of mental illnesses, and that
these beliefs about the supernatural cause of mental illness are not merely
due to cultural influences (Ally & Laher, 2008). However,
a comparative study of patients in Pakistan and Saudi Arabia suggested that
ethnic and cultural factors are reflected in the schizophrenia symptoms,
even if both populations adhere to the same religion (Ahmed & Naeem, 1984).
Participants in our study shared similar views, as they tried to focus on
the root of the problem as defined by the Arab culture (as opposed to
Islam). It is well documented that such beliefs leave the patients suffering
for a long time before they reach the point of seeking the proper
psychiatric treatment (El-Islam, 2008). Others argue that Islam as a religion has a
positive impact on Muslim patients; for example, Islam gives Muslims a
unique set of behaviors, ethics, and social values, which help them to
develop adaptive strategies and strong family ties to deal with different
life situations (Sabry
& Vohra, 2013). It is worth adding that families are the
ones usually seeking help from the religious figures or traditional healers.
In communities such as Qatar and Kuwait, it has been demonstrated that
families show great interest in caring for, and being part of decisions on
behalf of, their sick ones (Harding & Curran, 1978).
Other cultures have also demonstrated the relevance of family ties on the
assessment and treatment of patients with schizophrenia (Lee, Yamada, Kim, &
Dinh, 2015; Villares, Redko, & Mari, 2017). Thus, it is important for
the teams using these scales in various cultures to decide during the
training of the raters what is considered a normal versus pathological
variant according to the local cultural norms. This is very relevant to
PANSS, where rating on each item ranges from 1–2 as normal with graded
intensity, up to 7 as extremely abnormal. In addition, several items in the
PANSS mandate the input of the primary caregivers (family and staff) and the
teams should be trained on how to address the impact of the cultural context
on the ratings of these items.

Regarding the gender theme, Arabic societies are generally male-dominant. They
have been described as “conservative,” and communication between the genders
is not as open as in Western societies (Hawamdeh & Raigangar, 2014).
Furthermore, studies have shown that there are gender differences in
symptomatology among mentally ill patients (Versola-Russo, 2006). Social
differences and gender issues are also commonly described in the literature
on Arab culture (Al-Krenawi & Graham, 1999). A study by El-Islam and Abu-Dagga
(1990) showed that education level had a significant influence
on how men and women perceive the cause, treatment course, and outcome of
their illnesses. Seeman,
Seeman, and Sayles (1985) stated that gender differences might
be attributed to the increased levels of stress due to the high expectations
from males vs. the more social protective factors in females. In addition,
some practices are part of local traditions that are also reinforced by the
health care providers, rather than by religious taboos. For example, women
usually ask for a female health care provider, and they don’t easily share
personal issues. They tend to avoid eye contact and speak in a low tone with
male physicians. On the other hand, and depending on their culture and
religion, the clinicians themselves might reciprocate the women’s behaviors
or perceive them as unwilling to engage in the interview. It is also a
common practice in the GCC to match the local Arab women with female health
care providers, although this is not mandated by the Islamic religion. Thus,
these gender differences, together with their impact on recruitment and
rating of PANSS items, should be taken into consideration during the
research plans and training of raters. Such initial focus group discussions
with caregivers, patients, families, and raters can improve the reliability
and validity of the PANSS ratings.

Local studies have emphasized that mental health measurements and interventions
need to be culturally adapted to the Middle Eastern context (Al-Krenawi et al.,
2000). In this respect, we can add that a unique aspect
characterizes the Arabic language, where the formal written version differs
substantially from the spoken vernacular. There are also major and
substantial differences that exist within the different Arabic regions and
subcultures, for example between Bedouin and sedentary speech, the
countryside and major cities, religious groups, men and women, as well as
young and old (Bassiouney, 2009). Arabic speakers are often able to modulate
the way they speak based on the circumstances, which can clearly impact the
way patients express their clinical symptoms. For example, Nydell (1987)
pointed out that Arabs use many repetitions of phrases and themes, along
with exaggerated reports and descriptions, to stress the importance of what
is being said. It was noted that Arabic patients who lack the knowledge of
the Arabic medical jargon could change the way they express their emotions
and psychological states. Thus, in Arab communities, the communication style
and level of knowledge of patients should be taken into account when
assessing how they express their symptoms and feelings. The impact of such
themes on the assessment and diagnosis of patients has also been described
in other countries. For example, in African Americans, evidence showed that
a lack of cultural understanding, as well as racial differences in the
presentation of psychiatric symptoms, was associated with an over-diagnosis
of schizophrenia patients (Barnes, 2004). Other studies have
demonstrated the benefits of culturally adapted assessments (Zandi et al.,
2016) and interventions in patients with psychosis, especially
on the ratings of symptom severity (Degnan et al., 2017; Raffard
et al., 2015). Another important observation by the CRCs is the lack of
clear semantic terms for the psychiatric symptoms among patients, e.g.,
words like depression, mania, delusion, etc. (Table 2). Instead, patients tend
to use somatic terms and expressions and to seek medical treatments without
insight into their possible relationship to their psychiatric disorder. This
was also supported by the factor structure analysis of the Arabic version of
PANSS, which showed very similar components to other culturally validated
PANSS, except for the item on somatic concerns, which was factored as a
separate component and was not associated with the other components of
psychotic or depressive symptoms (Yehya et al., 2017).

There are some limitations that might affect the outcomes and should be
controlled for in future studies. In the quantitative studies (Yehya et al.,
2016), we elaborated on some of these limitations, e.g., sample
size, gender differences, using formal Arabic translations, and the impact
of level of education of participants. Other limitations that are more
relevant to this qualitative study include the fact that the majority of the
Arabs are Qataris in this sample, and that as such, the various Arabic
sub-cultures and dialects are not represented well enough to generalize the
results to all Arabs. Larger studies using local dialects in specific Arabic
countries with homogeneous local CRCs might further our understanding of the
impact of Arabic sub-cultures on PANSS content and ratings. Another
limitation is the lack of qualitative thematic analysis from interviews with
the patients themselves and their families, which is important to better
understand the main socio-cultural themes related to the assessment of
patients with schizophrenia. Larger initial piloting of patients and
caregivers can provide feedback for refining the translations and for
training raters to administer the PANSS.

Conclusion
The results of this qualitative analysis of the issues encountered when
administering the Arabic version of PANSS to Arab patients with
schizophrenia highlighted several matters related to the conduct of the
interview itself, the semantic translations, the clinical relevance of some
of the items, and the process of rating the 30 items in PANSS. In addition,
the analysis confirmed several themes that every research team needs to
address adequately in the Arabic population, including the religious
convictions that might overlap with some psychotic features, the gender
differences in expressing the various symptoms, and how the communication
styles can affect the assessment of psychopathology in Arab patients with
schizophrenia.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: The Qatar National
Research Fund (QNRF) supported this study (NPRP 4-268-3-086). The QNRF did
not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

Iman Amro, RN, is a member of the AFN in the UK and holds an MSc
in International Public Health Nutrition from the University of Westminster
in London. Currently, Iman works as a tutor at the distance-learning
department at Bradford College – West Yorkshire in the UK. Iman has
extensive working experience in the health field; she is a formal clinical
research coordinator at Weill Cornell Medicine – Qatar. Her research focus
is on the influence of culture on mental health and psychopathology and on
patients suffering from lifestyle-associated diseases and metabolic
disorders.

Suhaila Ghuloum, FRCPsych, is a Senior Consultant Psychiatrist at
Hamad Medical Corporation, Qatar, and an Associate Professor at Weill
Cornell Medicine – Qatar. She is a Fellow of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, elected Chair of the Middle East Division of the RCPsych, and
zone 12 representative for the World Psychiatry Association. She is a member
of the WHO Guidelines Development Group for Severe Mental Disorder. She is
involved in several academic, educational, and administrative
responsibilities. Dr. Ghuloum is interested in schizophrenia and psychiatric
epidemiology.

Ziyad Mahfoud, PhD, is the Director of Health Quantitative
Sciences in the Institution of Population Health at Weill Cornell Medicine –
Qatar and an Associate Professor of Biostatistics in the Department of
Health Care Policy and Research at Weill Cornell Medicine – Qatar and Weill
Cornell Medicine in New York. Dr. Mahfoud has extensive experience in the
validation of mental health scales among different populations. He is also
interested in studying mental health, bullying, and suicide ideation among
schoolchildren. Dr. Mahfoud is currently the Co-Principal Investigator of a
grant looking into stigma towards mental health patients as reported by
patients, patients’ families, and health care workers.

Mark G. A. Opler, PhD, is Chief Research Officer at
MedAvante-ProPhase Inc. and Adjunct Assistant Professor in the Department of
Psychiatry at New York University School of Medicine. Dr. Opler researches
the etiology, phenomenology, and assessment of mental disorders, with a
focus on schizophrenia and psychosis. He is a co-author and developer of
several assessment tools, including the SNAPSI, CGI-DS, and NY-AACENT, and a
contributor to the most recent edition of the PANSS Manual.

Anzalee Khan, PhD, is a Sr. Statistician at NeuroCog Trials,
Durham, NC, USA and a Research Scientist at Nathan S. Kline Institute of
Psychiatric Research, NY, USA. Dr. Khan researches areas in CNS Clinical
Trials primarily in Schizophrenia and across ethnic populations. She is
currently the Principal Investigator of the trials in schizophrenia research
assessing psychometric properties of scales, as well as the Co-Principal
Investigator of pharmacological clinical trials. Her published works focus
on mental health services research, as well as conceptual, statistical,
psychometric, and methodological issues within and across cultures and their
effects on service delivery.

Samer Hammoudeh, DrPH, is an Academic Research Associate at the
Medical Research Center at Hamad Medical Corporation, and a Visiting
Researcher at Weill Cornell Medicine – Qatar. Dr. Hammoudeh researches
mental health services for Arabs and other ethnic populations residing in
Qatar. He is currently part of several research projects with various roles.
His published works focus on mental health, epidemiology, public health, and
lifestyle diseases.

Yahya Mohamed Hani, MD, is a research fellow at Hamad Medical
Corporation and a visiting researcher at Weill Cornell Medicine – Qatar. He
has contributed to several clinical research projects, including metabolic
syndrome in patients receiving antipsychotics, the validation and cultural
adaptation of clinical psychiatric scales to Arabic, schizophrenia genetics
in the Qatari and Arab populations, and patient and family satisfaction on
mental health services for patients with schizophrenia in Qatar. His
published work is related to validation of Arabic scales and metabolic
syndrome.

Arij Yehya, MA, is an instructor at the Core Curriculum Program at
Qatar University. Mrs. Yehya researches the psychological aspects of mental
health and the epidemiology of mental health fields. Her published works
focus on the validation of Arabic versions of different mental health
assessments. She is currently working on student mental health and keys to
success in university settings.

Hassen Al-Amin, MD, is an Associate Professor of Psychiatry at
Weill Cornell Medicine – Qatar and a consultant at Hamad Medical
Corporation, Doha, Qatar. He was the principal investigator on the cultural
adaptation and validation of scales used in the assessment of schizophrenia
patients in Qatar and is currently leading a project on the genetics of
schizophrenia in Qatar. His published works focus on the neurobiology of
schizophrenia, the validation of Arabic scales to study schizophrenia, and
the metabolic effects of antipsychotics.


Appendix I
Questions used by the facilitator of the focus group discussions:
What does the group think about the Arabic
translation per se and did the patients comment on
specific translational issues?

How did you handle the different Arabic
sub-cultures when administering the Arabic
SCI-PANSS?

What questions needed further elaborations or
explanations during the interview?

What were the advantages and challenges
encountered during the interview using Arabic
SCI-PANSS?

What themes or topics were difficult to engage
patients with or to assess their responses?

When evaluating the patients, what cultural
matters did you encounter and how did you handle
them? What were the reactions of the patients to
these matters?

When using the item descriptions in the PANSS,
what challenges did you face?

When rating the different items in PANSS, did you
have to read all the descriptions of each rating
after each assessment?

How did you handle the items that require the
input of the primary care givers? Did you rely on
the family members or the staff involved in
patients’ care?

Did the training prepare you to handle the
challenges you encountered during the assessment
and rating procedures? Any suggestions for further
training?
==== Refs
References
Abou-Saleh M. T. Ghubash R. Daradkeh T. K.   (2001 ) Al Ain community
psychiatric survey. I. Prevalence and socio-demographic
correlates . Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology 
36 :
20 –28 .11320804 
Ahmed S. H. Naeem S.   (1984 ) First rank symptoms
and diagnosis of schizophrenia in developing
countries . Psychopathology 
17 :
275 –279 .6537543 
Al-Krenawi A. Graham J. R.   (1997 ) Spirit possession
and exorcism in the treatment of a Bedouin psychiatric
patient . Clinical Social Work
Journal 
25 :
211 –222 .
Al-Krenawi A. Graham J. R.   (1999 ) Social work and
Koranic mental health healers .
International Social Work 
42 :
53 –65 .
Al-Krenawi A. Graham J. R. Kandah J.   (2000 ) Gendered
utilization differences of mental health services in
Jordan . Community Mental Health
Journal 
36 :
501 –511 .10994683 
Ally Y. Laher S.   (2008 ) South African
Muslim faith healers’ perceptions of mental illness:
Understanding, aetiology and treatment .
Journal of Religion and Health 
47 : 45 –56 .
doi:
10.1007/s10943-007-9133-2 .19105000 
American Psychiatric
Association  (2000 ) Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , 4th
ed 
Washington, DC :
American Psychiatric
Association .
Amorim P. Lecrubier Y. Weiller E. Hergueta T. Sheehan D.   (1998 ) DSM-IV-TR Psychotic
Disorders: Procedural validity of the Mini International
Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI). Concordance and causes for
discordance with the CIDI . European
Psychiatry 
13 : 26 –34 .
doi:
10.1016/S0924-9338(97)86748-X .19698595 
Barnes A.   (2004 ) Race,
schizophrenia, and admission to state psychiatric
hospitals . Administration and Policy in
Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research 
31 :
241 –252 .15160786 
Bassiouney R.   (2009 ) Arabic
Sociolinguistics , Edinburgh,
Ireland : Edinburgh University
Press , pp. i –xiv 
and 311.
Berkanovic E.   (1980 ) The effect of
inadequate language translation on Hispanics' responses to
health surveys . American Journal of
Public Health 
70 :
1273 –1276 .7435745 
Bhui K. Stansfeld S. Hull S. Priebe S. Mole F. Feder G.   (2003 ) Ethnic variations
in pathways to and use of specialist mental health services in
the UK. Systematic review . British
Journal of Psychiatry 
182 :
105 –116 .12562737 
Degnan A. Baker S. Edge D. Nottidge W. Noke M. Press C. J. Drake R. J.   (2017 ) The nature and
efficacy of culturally-adapted psychosocial interventions for
schizophrenia: A systematic review and
meta-analysis . Psychological
Medicine 
23 : 1 –14 . doi:
10.1017/S0033291717002264 .
El-Islam M. F.   (2008 ) Arab culture and
mental health care . Transcultural
Psychiatry 
45 :
671 –682 .19091731 
El-Islam M. F. Abu-Dagga S. I.   (1990 ) Illness behaviour
in mental ill-health in Kuwait .
Scandinavian Journal of Social Medicine 
18 :
195 –201 .2237327 
First M. B. Spitzer R. L. Gibbon M. Williams J. B. W.   (2002 ) Structured clinical
interview for DSM-IV-TR axis I disorders, research version,
patient edition (SCID-I/P) biometrics research ,
New York : New
York State Psychiatric
Institute .
Ghanem M. Gadallah M. Meky F. A. Mourad S. El Kholy G.   (2009 ) National survey of
prevalence of mental disorders in Egypt: Preliminary
survey . Eastern Mediterranean Health
Journal 
15 :
65 –75 .19469428 
Ghuloum S. Bener A. Abou-Saleh M. T.   (2011 ) Prevalence of
mental disorders in adult population attending primary health
care setting in Qatari population .
Journal of Pakistan Medical Association 
61 :
216 –221 .
Hallit S. Obeid S. Haddad C. Kazour F. Kazour G. R.   (2017 ) Validation of the
Arabic Version of the PANSS scale among Lebanese schizophrenic
patients . Journal of
Psychopathology 
23 :
60 –66 .
Harding T. W. Curran W. J.   (1978 ) Promoting mental
health through the law . WHO
Chronicle 
32 :
109 –113 .645065 
Hawamdeh S. Raigangar V.   (2014 ) Qualitative
interviewing: Methodological challenges in Arab
settings . Nursing Research 
21 : 27 –31 .
doi:
10.7748/nr2014.01.21.3.27.e357 .
Jablensky A. Sartorius N. Ernberg G. Anker M. Korten A. Cooper J. E. Bertelsen A.   (1992 ) Schizophrenia:
Manifestations, incidence and course in different cultures. A
World Health Organization ten-country study .
Psychological Medicine Monograph Supplement 
20 :
1 –97 .1565705 
Kadri N. Agoub M. El Gnaoui S. Alami K. M. Hergueta T. Moussaoui D.   (2005 ) Moroccan colloquial
Arabic version of the Mini International Neuropsychiatric
Interview (MINI): Qualitative and quantitative
validation . European Psychiatry 
20 :
193 –195 .15797707 
Karam E. G. Mneimneh Z. N. Karam A. N. Fayyad J. A. Nasser S. C. Chatterji S. Kessler R. C.   (2006 ) Prevalence and
treatment of mental disorders in Lebanon: A national
epidemiological survey . Lancet 
367 : 1000 –1006 .
doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68427-4 .16564362 
Kay S. R. Fiszbein A. Opler L. A.   (1987 ) The positive and
negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for
schizophrenia . Schizophrenia
Bulletin 
13 :
261 –276 .3616518 
Kirkbride J. B. Fearon P. Morgan C. Dazzan P. Morgan K. Murray R. M. Jones P. B.   (2007 ) Neighbourhood
variation in the incidence of psychotic disorders in Southeast
London . Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology 
42 : 438 –445 .
doi:
10.1007/s00127-007-0193-0 .17473901 
Kirkbride J. B. Fearon P. Morgan C. Dazzan P. Morgan K. Tarrant J. Jones P. B.   (2006 ) Heterogeneity in
incidence rates of schizophrenia and other psychotic syndromes:
Findings from the 3-center AeSOP study .
Archives of General Psychiatry 
63 : 250 –258 .
doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.63.3.250 .16520429 
Lee K. K. Yamada A. M. Kim M. A. Dinh T. Q.   (2015 ) Interdependent
recovery of adults with schizophrenia: Asian American consumer
perspectives of family involvement and
influence . Psychiatric Rehabilitation
Journal 
38 : 273 –275 .
doi: 10.1037/prj0000076 .25000120 
Malterud K.   (2001 ) Qualitative
research: Standards, challenges, and guidelines .
Lancet 
358 :
483 –488 .11513933 
Miles M. B. Huberman A. M.   (1994 ) Qualitative data analysis:
An expanded sourcebook , 2nd ed 
Thousand Oaks :
SAGE
Publications .
Nydell M.   (1987 ) Understanding Arabs: A
guide for Westerners , Yarmouth,
ME : Intercultural
Press .
Opler L. A. Ramirez P. M.   (1998 ) Use of the Positive
and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) in clinical
practice . Journal of Psychiatric
practice 
4 :
157 –162 .
Overall J. E. Gorham D. R.   (1962 ) The brief
psychiatric rating scale . Psychological
Reports 
10 :
799 –812 .
Picchioni M. M. Murray R. M.   (2007 )
Schizophrenia .
BMJ 
335 : 91 –95 .
doi:
10.1136/bmj.39227.616447.BE .17626963 
Prince M.   (2008 ) Measurement
validity in cross-cultural comparative research .
Epidemiologia E psichiatria sociale 
17 (3 ):
211 –220 .18924560 
Qatar Statistics
Authority. 2015. Qatar census. Retrieved from
http://www.qsa.gov.qa .
Raffard, S., Salesse, R.
N., Marin, L., Del-Monte, J., Schmidt, R. C., Varlet, M., Bardy,
B. G., Boulenger, J. P., & Capdevielle, D. (2015). Social
priming enhances interpersonal synchronization and feeling of
connectedness towards schizophrenia patients. Scientific
Reports, 5, 8156. doi:
10.1038/srep08156 .
Room R. Janca A. Bennett L. A. Schmidt L. Sartorius N.   (1996 ) WHO cross-cultural
applicability research on diagnosis and assessment of substance
use disorders: An overview of methods and selected
results . Addiction 
91 :
199 –220 .8835277 
Sabry W. M. Vohra A.   (2013 ) Role of Islam in
the management of psychiatric disorders .
Indian Journal of Psychiatry 
55 (suppl 2 ):
S205 –S214 .23858256 
Sartorius N. Jablensky A. Korten A. Ernberg G. Anker M. Cooper J. E. Day R.   (1986 ) Early
manifestations and first-contact incidence of schizophrenia in
different cultures. A preliminary report on the initial
evaluation phase of the WHO Collaborative Study on determinants
of outcome of severe mental disorders .
Psychological Medicine 
16 :
909 –928 .3493497 
Seeman M. Seeman T. Sayles M.   (1985 ) Social networks and
health status: A longitudinal analysis .
Social Psychology Quarterly 
48 :
237 –248 .
Simonsen E. Mortensen E. L.   (1990 ) Difficulties in
translation of personality scales .
Journal of Personality Disorders 
4 :
290 –296 .
Versola-Russo J.   (2006 ) Cultural and
demographic factors of schizophrenia .
International Journal of Psychosocial
Rehabilitation 
10 :
89 –103 .
Villares C. C. Redko C. P. Mari J. J.   (2017 ) Conceptualizations
of illness among relatives of patients diagnosed with
schizophrenia . International Reviews in
Psychiatry 
29 : 230 –240 .
doi:
10.1080/09540261.2017.1285549 .
White, G. M. (1982). The
ethnographic study of cultural knowledge of “mental disorder”.
In A. J. Marselaa, & G. M. White (Eds.), Cultural
conceptions of mental health and therapy (pp.
69–95). Springer Netherlands .
World Health Organization
(WHO)  (2010 ) The ICD-10
classification of mental and behavioural disorders: Clinical
descriptions and diagnostic guidelines ,
Geneva : World
Health Organization .
Yehya A. Ghuloum S. Mahfoud Z. Opler M. Khan A. Hammoudeh S. Al-Amin H.   (2016 ) Validity and
reliability of the Arabic version of the Positive and Negative
Syndrome Scale . Psychopathology 
49 :
181 –187 .27475457 
Yehya A. Ghuloum S. Mahfoud Z. Opler M. Khan A. Hammoudeh S. Hani Y. Al-Amin H.   (2017 ) Validation of the
five-factor model of the Arabic version of the Positive and
Negative Syndrome Scale in schizophrenia .
Psychopathology 
50 : 211 –218 .
doi: 10.1159/000472154 .28514778 
Zandi T. Havenaar J. M. Laan W. Kahn R. S. Brink W. v.   (2016 ) Effects of a
culturally sensitive assessment on symptom profiles in native
Dutch and Moroccan patients with a first psychosis
referral . Transcultural
Psychiatry 
53 :
45 –59 .25851336

