
==== Front
eLifeElifeeLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, Ltd 300038733775410.7554/eLife.37754Research AdvanceBiochemistry and Chemical BiologyHuman Biology and MedicineUnexpected similarities between C9ORF72 and sporadic forms of ALS/FTD suggest a common disease mechanism Conlon Erin G 1Fagegaltier Delphine 2Agius Phaedra 3Davis-Porada Julia 1Gregory James 2Hubbard Isabel 2Kang Kristy 2Kim Duyang 2The New York Genome Center ALS ConsortiumPhatnani Hemali Center for Genomics of Neurodegenerative DiseasesNew York Genome CenterNew YorkUnited StatesKwan Justin Department of NeurologyUniversity of Maryland School of Medicine, University of Maryland ALS ClinicBaltimoreUnited StatesSareen Dhruv Cedars-Sinai Department of Biomedical SciencesBoard of Governors Regenerative Medicine Institute and Brain Program, Cedars-Sinai Medical CenterLos AngelesUnited StatesDepartment of MedicineUniversity of CaliforniaLos AngelesUnited StatesBroach James R Department of Biochemistry and Molecular BiologyPenn State Institute for Personalized Medicine, The Pennsylvania State UniversityHersheyUnited StatesSimmons Zachary Department of NeurologyThe Pennsylvania State UniversityHersheyUnited StatesArcila-Londono Ximena Department of NeurologyHenry Ford Health SystemDetroitUnited StatesLee Edward B Department of Pathology and Laboratory MedicinePerelman School of Medicine, University of PennsylvaniaPhiladelphiaUnited StatesVan Deerlin Vivianna M Department of Pathology and Laboratory MedicinePerelman School of Medicine, University of PennsylvaniaPhiladelphiaUnited StatesShneider Neil A Department of Neurology, Center for Motor Neuron Biology and DiseaseInstitute for Genomic Medicine, Columbia UniversityNew YorkUnited StatesFraenkel Ernest Department of Biological EngineeringMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyCambridgeUnited StatesOstrow Lyle W Department of NeurologyJohns Hopkins School of MedicineBaltimoreUnited StatesBaas Frank Department of NeurogeneticsAcademic Medical Centre, Amsterdam and Leiden University Medical CenterLeidenNetherlandsZaitlen Noah Department of Medicine, Lung Biology CenterUniversity of California, San FranciscoSan FranciscoUnited StatesBerry James D ALS Multidisciplinary Clinic, Neuromuscular Division, Department of NeurologyHarvard Medical SchoolBostonUnited StatesNeurological Clinical Research InstituteMassachusetts General HospitalBostonUnited StatesMalaspina Andrea Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and DentistryQueen Mary University of LondonLondonUnited KingdomDepartment of NeurologyBasildon University HospitalBasildonUnited KingdomFratta Pietro Institute of Neurology, National Hospital for Neurology and NeurosurgeryUniversity College LondonLondonUnited KingdomCox Gregory A The Jackson LaboratoryBar HarborUnited StatesThompson Leslie M Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior and Department of Biological Chemistry, School of MedicineUniversity of California, IrvineIrvineUnited StatesDepartment of Neurobiology and Behavior, School of Biological SciencesUniversity of California, IrvineIrvineUnited StatesFinkbeiner Steve Taube/Koret Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and MedicineGladstone InstituteSan FranciscoUnited StatesDardiotis Efthimios Department of Neurology and Sensory OrgansUniversity of ThessalyThessalyGreeceMiller Timothy M Department of NeurologyWashington University in St. LouisSt. LouisUnited StatesChandran Siddharthan Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, Anne Rowling Regenerative Neurology Clinic, Euan MacDonald Centre for Motor Neurone Disease ResearchUniversity of EdinburghEdinburghUnited KingdomPal Suvankar Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, Anne Rowling Regenerative Neurology Clinic, Euan MacDonald Centre for Motor Neurone Disease ResearchUniversity of EdinburghEdinburghUnited KingdomHornstein Eran Department of Molecular GeneticsWeizmann Institute of ScienceRehovotIsraelMacGowan Daniel J Department of NeurologyIcahn School of Medicine at Mount SinaiNew YorkUnited StatesHeiman-Patterson Terry Center for Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of Neurology, the Lewis Katz School of MedicineTemple UniversityPhiladelphiaUnited StatesHammell Molly G Cold Spring Harbor LaboratoryCold Spring HarborUnited StatesPatsopoulos Nikolaos A Computer Science and Systems Biology Program, Ann Romney Center for Neurological Diseases, Department of NeurologyBrigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical SchoolBostonUnited StatesDivision of Genetics in Department of MedicineBrigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical SchoolBostonUnited StatesProgram in Medical and Population GeneticsBroad InstituteCambridgeUnited StatesDubnau Joshua Department of AnesthesiologyStony Brook UniversityStony BrookUnited StatesNath Avindra Section of Infections of the Nervous SystemNational Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIHBethesdaUnited States Phatnani Hemali 2Shneider Neil A http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3223-73664Manley James L https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8341-1459jlm2@columbia.edu11 Department of Biological SciencesColumbia UniversityNew YorkUnited States2 Center for Genomics of Neurodegenerative DiseaseNew York Genome CenterNew YorkUnited States3 New York Genome CenterNew YorkUnited States4 Department of NeurologyColumbia University Medical CenterNew YorkUnited States13 7 2018 2018 7 e3775423 4 2018 09 7 2018 © 2018, Conlon et al2018Conlon et alhttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use and redistribution provided that the original author and source are credited.Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) represent two ends of a disease spectrum with shared clinical, genetic and pathological features. These include near ubiquitous pathological inclusions of the RNA-binding protein (RBP) TDP-43, and often the presence of a GGGGCC expansion in the C9ORF72 (C9) gene. Previously, we reported that the sequestration of hnRNP H altered the splicing of target transcripts in C9ALS patients (Conlon et al., 2016). Here, we show that this signature also occurs in half of 50 postmortem sporadic, non-C9 ALS/FTD brains. Furthermore, and equally surprisingly, these ‘like-C9’ brains also contained correspondingly high amounts of insoluble TDP-43, as well as several other disease-related RBPs, and this correlates with widespread global splicing defects. Finally, we show that the like-C9 sporadic patients, like actual C9ALS patients, were much more likely to have developed FTD. We propose that these unexpected links between C9 and sporadic ALS/FTD define a common mechanism in this disease spectrum.

amyotrophic lateral aclerosisfrontotemporal dementiamRNA splicingRNA binding proteinsResearch organism
Humanhttp://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000052NIH Office of the DirectorR35 GM 118136Manley James L http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000052NIH Office of the Director5T32GM008798Conlon Erin G http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000971Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Association15-LGCA-234Phatnani Hemali The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.Author impact statementIdiopathic patients along a complex motor neuron disease-dementia spectrum exhibit mRNA splicing changes that are due to multi-protein insolubility.
==== Body
Introduction
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease that afflicts approximately 1 in 400 people worldwide (Alonso et al., 2009). Diagnosis is predicated on symptoms of motor neuron (MN) loss from the primary motor cortex (upper MNs), brainstem and spinal cord (lower MNs), which results in progressive weakness and loss of motor control, and eventually paralysis and death (Rowland and Shneider, 2001). While predominantly a motor disorder, many ALS patients experience cognitive and behavioral changes, and ~10–15% of ALS patients meet formal criteria for a diagnosis of frontotemporal dementia (FTD; Lattante et al., 2015; Ling et al., 2013). FTD is a heterogeneous condition marked by the degeneration of neurons in the frontal cortex, and patients exhibit a range of cognitive, behavioral and language deficits (Seelaar et al., 2011).

The co-occurrence of ALS and FTD is genetically determined in some cases, most often by the dominantly inherited C9ORF72 (C9) hexanucleotide expansion (DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011; Renton et al., 2011). The presence of a single copy of expanded C9 increases sharply the chance that an ALS-afflicted individual will be diagnosed with FTD, from 10 to ~50% (Byrne et al., 2012). While consensus on precisely how the expanded sequence acts as a pathological unit has remained elusive, we have shown that the repeat-containing RNA can directly sequester the RNA-binding protein (RBP) hnRNP H, leading to dysregulation of pre-mRNA splicing (Conlon et al., 2016). Generally, our and others’ evidence for proteinaceous aggregates, seeded by RNAs and which are prone to undergo phase transitions (Fay et al., 2017; Jain and Vale, 2017; Schwartz et al., 2013), may offer a bridge from aggregation - as a classical observation of neurodegenerative disease (Ginsberg et al., 1998; Ross and Poirier, 2004) - to a biophysical mechanism at the origins of ALS/FTD, in cases both with and without disease-associated mutations (Alberti and Hyman, 2016; Conlon and Manley, 2017; Mackenzie et al., 2017; Murakami et al., 2015).

Histopathologic similarities also link ALS and FTD on this disease spectrum. In almost all ALS and over half of FTD patients, the distributions of pathological cytoplasmic accumulation of the hnRNP-like DNA/RNA binding protein TDP-43 tend to correlate with areas of neurodegeneration (Baloh, 2011). Although the observed aggregates of TDP-43 come in several forms (Scotter et al., 2015), translocation and nuclear clearance events are of particular interest, as they have suggested a loss-of-function (LOF) mechanism (Vanden Broeck et al., 2014), predicted to impact mRNA processing and transport (Humphrey et al., 2017; Ling et al., 2015; Polymenidou et al., 2011; Tollervey et al., 2011). While TDP-43 aggregation could reflect the downstream effects of cell death rather than the cause, the existence of ALS-causing mutations in the gene that encodes TDP-43 (TARDBP) suggests that the protein has a deterministic role in the ALS/FTD spectrum (Scotter et al., 2015). Between the extremes of bystander and instigator, it is possible that changes to TDP-43 reflect an important indicator of upstream processes that influence RBPs more pervasively.

In all ALS/FTD cases with TDP-43 pathology, aggregation may be driven by any number of factors that impact the protein’s ability to form stoichiometrically correct interactions with itself or with other nuclear proteins and RNAs. For example, disease-linked changes affecting the solubility properties of other RBPs (Harrison and Shorter, 2017), including hnRNP H (Conlon et al., 2016), have the potential to affect solubility of RBPs they interact with, like TDP-43 (Freibaum et al., 2010; Ling et al., 2010), although whether this occurs in ALS/FTD patient brains is unknown. Extending this idea, downstream changes to the transcriptome, particularly splicing patterns, may result from combinatorial deficiencies of several RBPs (Huelga et al., 2012; Mohagheghi et al., 2016), making it difficult to pinpoint the initiating event or distinguish specific effects of TDP-43 LOF.

In this study, we have investigated whether the biochemical ‘signature’ we described previously for C9ALS might extend to a broader spectrum of ALS/FTD patients. For this, we analyzed splicing and RBP solubility in 50 postmortem human brains from patients with sporadic ALS, FTD with motor neuron disease (MND) and ALS-FTD (collectively, sALS/FTD), all of which were negative for known disease mutations, including C9. Unexpectedly, we identified splicing dysregulation of known hnRNP H targets (Conlon et al., 2016) in a large fraction of patients, and used the extent of splicing dysregulation to divide the patients into two groups, like-control and like-C9. Notably, we found that the like-C9 patient brains also had higher amounts of insoluble hnRNP H, the amount of which directly correlated with the magnitude of splicing dysregulation. Importantly, several other abundant RBPs linked to ALS, including TDP-43, showed the same patterns of insolubility as hnRNP H. Consistent with this, we found pervasive splicing dysregulation genome wide in like-C9 brains. Intriguingly, the like-control cases with lowest hnRNP H/TDP-43 insolubility displayed almost no splicing dysregulation, despite the ubiquitous presence of histopathological TDP-43 inclusions. Finally, and importantly, we show that like-C9 patients, similar to actual C9ALS patients, were much more prone to develop dementia than were like-control patients. Together, our data define unanticipated biochemical similarities between a large fraction of sALS/FTD cases and C9ALS/FTD, suggesting a common mechanism underlying disease pathogenesis.

Results
Patient stratification based on graded inclusion of hnRNP H-regulated exons
C9 expansion is the most common known cause of ALS/FTD. However, a large majority of cases, especially amongst the 90% that are sporadic in origin, are of unknown etiology. When initially characterizing hnRNP H-dependent splicing events, we compared C9ALS/FTD patients to neurological controls and SOD1 ALS (not believed to proceed through a mechanism of RBP dysfunction or aggregation; Ling et al., 2013), but not to sALS/FTD (Conlon et al., 2016). Indeed, sALS/FTD is a mechanistic unknown and may constitute a wide range of molecular subtypes. Given that TDP-43 and hnRNP H appear to interact (Appocher et al., 2017; Ling et al., 2010; Sephton et al., 2011) in a manner that is largely RNA dependent (Freibaum et al., 2010), it is reasonable to speculate that changes in RNA binding and/or solubility of one might impact the other, leading to more complex patterns of splicing dysregulation.

We first set out to determine whether splicing patterns specific to C9ALS/FTD could be distinguished from those related to ALS/FTD more generally. To do this, we initially analyzed whether sALS/FTD patients display splicing changes similar to those we described in C9 patients (Conlon et al., 2016) (Figure 1a). Specifically, we measured alternative exon inclusion by 32P-RT-PCR of oligo(dT)-selected RNA samples purified from post-mortem cerebellum from 50 sporadic patients: 32 classified as ALS (without cognitive/behavioral involvement), seven as ALS-FTD (symptoms of both disorders during the patient’s life), and 11 as FTD with motor neuron disease (FTD-MND) defined by a lack of clinical ALS symptoms yet the presence of pathological MN degeneration at autopsy. We also included two patients carrying pathogenic SOD1 variants, and four patients carrying C9 repeat expansions, for a total of 56 cases (Supplementary file 1A).

10.7554/eLife.37754.002Figure 1. Patient stratification into like-control and like-C9 groups by aberrant splicing of known hnRNP H-target exons.
(a) List of hnRNP H target exons, separated into enhanced and repressed categories. (b) (Top) Simplified diagram of enhanced and repressed exons with relative binding of hnRNP H (H1). (Bottom) Depiction of expected product when H1 levels are at normal physiological levels (above dashed line) or low (hnRNP H deficient; below dashed line). (c–e) Representative PCR gels of all patient samples for two enhanced exons (ARRB2 and PPP1R12C) and one repressed exon (OS9). Pink boxes show samples F09-F13 that consistently exhibited large magnitudes of change in inclusion. (f) Graph of CSS by group: nonALS, C9ALS, like-control and like-C9. Each point represents the CSS of an individual patient. Red dashed line marks the cutoff of 3 standard deviations below the control mean. Error bars are plotted to the SEM. (g) Comparison of percent exon inclusion of 18 hnRNP H-target exons between like-control and like-C9 patient replicate values. Exons are ordered by enhanced exons (KIF1C-PCBP2) followed by repressed exons (RPL10-HNRPDL). Error bars are plotted to the SEM. (t test p value: *=0.05, **=<0.01, ***=<0.0001, ****=<0.0001).

10.7554/eLife.37754.003Figure 1—figure supplement 1. RT-PCR of hnRNP H target genes.
(a–q) Representative PCR gels from all genes that are significantly altered between like-control and like-C9. In some instances, single samples failed to amplify thus leading to blank lanes. All reactions were repeated and re-run individually or in small groups (data not shown). Loading convention is gel 1: sALS 1–28, gel 2: sALS 29–41; FTD 1–15. Sample information can be found in Supplementary file 1A. Arrows indicate the position of exon inclusion (top) and exclusion (bottoms) products.



To assay hnRNP H-dependent splicing changes, we selected 18 known hnRNP H target exons that we previously found are differentially included in C9ALS/FTD compared to individuals without neurological symptoms and SOD1 ALS controls (Figure 1a). Four of the targets were hnRNP H-repressed exons, meaning hnRNP H normally represses inclusion when physiological levels of the protein are high, and the other 14 were hnRNP H-enhanced exons, which respond with decreased inclusion when hnRNP H levels are low (Figure 1b). Results obtained with two enhanced exons (from ARRB2 and PPP1R12C) and one repressed exon (from OS9) are shown in Figure 1c–e. Representative gels for all other genes analyzed are shown in Figure 1—figure supplement 1. The data revealed dramatic differences across many of the patient samples. We observed several patients that consistently had the lowest levels of enhanced exon inclusion for all 14 exons, and noticed that these same patients had the highest levels of repressed exon inclusion (e.g. boxed FTD-MND samples 9–13; Figure 1c–e). Other patients consistently displayed the opposite trend, or a milder version of both.

We next wished to classify the patients as either having or not having hnRNP H-dependent splicing changes. For this, we first averaged the percent inclusion of all the enhanced exons to define a single composite splicing score (CSS). We then compared the CSS values of sporadics to those of a set of neurological normal and SOD1-ALS controls, and to C9ALS/FTD patients. Interestingly, we observed that for these same 14 exons, the controls had a very close range of values, while the C9+ range was centered significantly lower and with a wider distribution (Figure 1f). Only a single control point deviated significantly from the mean; this point corresponds to the second SOD1-ALS patient and is likely due to poor RNA quality. Due to the rarity of SOD1-ALS post-mortem samples, we decided against discarding this patient. This is the only sample in the entire set where RNA quality was compromised.

We then wished to determine which, if any, of the sporadics had exon inclusion values in the range only accessible to C9+, and not control, brains. However, the wide range of CSS values of the C9+ group in theory made it impossible to classify a patient as C9+ or control based on a CSS similar to a control value. The converse, however, was not true: control samples had a close range of observed values, and all the patients with significantly lowered values were disease afflicted. Thus, we defined ‘like-control’ as any patient with a CSS within three standard deviations (SD) of the nonALS mean, since this range should encompass 99.7% of values within a normally distributed population. ‘Like-C9’ was then defined as all the patients with CSS values lower than this value. These two categories split the 50 patients into two groups of roughly equal size (Figure 1f). Comparison of like-control (n = 24) and like-C9 (n = 26) revealed a significant difference (p<0.05) between these two categories for each of the 18 genes, with only one exception, RPL10 (p=0.09) (Figure 1g).

We next wished to determine, for every individual hnRNP H-regulated exon we analyzed, if each patient displayed similar relative change in inclusion values as for all the other exons. To this end, we first re-calculated the CSS for each combination of 13 enhanced exons and plotted a best-fit line for each gene in the case where it was excluded from the average, using each patient’s percent exon inclusion value for that gene as a Y-coordinate. Indeed, we found that each individual gene followed the trend of the patients’ average CSS (Figure 2a; simplified to show three best- and one worst-fit lines, all others are shown in Figure 2—figure supplement 1), with the same patients consistently showing the most severe changes, and others consistently showing the most mild. Some genes had extremely good fit to a linear model (GABBR1, r-square = 0.90, ARRB2, r-square = 0.88), while others displayed the trend without as good a fit (PAN2, r-square = 0.40). We also averaged the four hnRNP H repressed exons, and plotted this value as a Y coordinate (Figure 2b). As expected, the patients with the lowest values of hnRNP H-enhanced exon CSS had the highest levels of average repressed exon inclusion, as the data fit well to an inverse linear relationship (r-square = 0.75).

10.7554/eLife.37754.004Figure 2. Differential concentration of hnRNP H due to insolubility explains graded splicing dysregulation in patient brains.
(a) Linear regression of percent exon inclusion (PEI) for each enhanced target exon compared to the average inclusion of all other enhanced exons. Clockwise from upper left: GABBR1, DOLPP1, PAN2, ARRB2, with r-square = 0.90, 0.86, 0.40, 0.88, respectively. (b) Linear regression of percent exon inclusion for the average of four repressed target exons compared to the average inclusion of all enhanced exons. R-square = 0.75. (c) (Upper) Diagram of biochemical fractionation and resultant fractions. (Lower) Representative example of 6 like-control and six like-C9 samples, western blotted for actin (cortex homogenate fraction) and hnRNP H (SOL, SS, SI). (d) Summary graph percent insoluble hnRNP H in motor cortex of like-controls versus like-C9s. Samples for which motor cortex was unavailable were excluded from this analysis. Each point represents a single patient with replicate values. Error bars are plotted to the SEM. (t test p value: *=0.05, **=<0.01, ***=<0.0001, ****=<0.0001). (e) Linear regression of percent insoluble hnRNP H compared to CSS, r-square = 0.58.

10.7554/eLife.37754.005Figure 2—figure supplement 1. Linear regression of hnRNP H enhanced exons.
(a–j) Linear regression all remaining genes not shown in Figure 2a. Percent exon inclusion (PEI) for each hnRNP H-target exon is plotted as a Y-coordinate compared to the average percent inclusion of all other hnRNP H-enhanced exons. R-square values are displayed.



Like-C9 sALS/FTD display increased hnRNP H insolubility
The above results defined a cohort of patients that displayed graded splicing dysregulation similar to what we observed in C9ALS patients. We next asked whether these patients also displayed increased levels of sarkosyl-insoluble hnRNP H, indicative of functional sequestration (see Conlon et al., 2016). To this end, we performed biochemical fractionation of motor cortex from all cases where tissue was available, with two independent replicates per case (Figure 2c). While we performed RNA analysis with cerebellum for abundance and RNA quality reasons, for fractionation we used motor cortex as it is a primary site of disease-specific degeneration. Given the historical range of our cohort, for some samples motor cortex was unavailable, and thus we omitted those cases from our analysis. We then analyzed equivalent amounts of each fraction, soluble (SOL), sarkosyl soluble (SS), and sarkosyl insoluble (SI), by Western blot (WB), and calculated the percentage of insoluble hnRNP H in each case. Using 39 samples (18 like-control and 21 like-C9), we found that the average percent insoluble hnRNP H was 69.2 in like-C9s, and 38.9 in like-control, or 1.78 times higher in like-C9, a highly significant increase in aggregated protein (p<0.0001) (Figure 2d; all average percent insolubility values are shown by patient in Supplementary file 1A). This enrichment closely resembles the 1.9-fold increase we previously reported in seven C9ALS/FTD (56.1% insoluble) compared to controls (30.0% insoluble).

We next wished to quantify the relationship, if any, between splicing severity and hnRNP H insolubility. We therefore performed the same regression analysis as we did above with splicing changes, except with percent sarkosyl-insoluble hnRNP H. We found that the general trend was for patients with large changes in splicing to have high insoluble hnRNP H (Figure 2e; r-square = 0.58). These observations suggest that hnRNP H is differentially sequestered, with patients showing a gradient of decreasing soluble hnRNP H that correlates with increasing splicing dysfunction. The correspondence between hnRNP H’s biochemical solubility and its predicted transcriptomic effects across distal brain regions from the same patients strongly supports the notion that this is an intrinsic, brain-wide property of each patient. Reinforcing this view, we also examined available postmortem pathological reports from 26 of the sporadic ALS/FTD patients. Significantly, 19 of these were noted to exhibit focal loss of Purkinje neurons in the cerebellum (Supplementary file 1A), confirming that regions of the brain undergoing robustly measured splicing defects did indeed experience neuronal degeneration. This further justifies our choice to correlate changes measured in the cerebellum with changes in the cortex.

Insolubility of hnRNP H correlates with that of the ALS-linked RBPs TDP-43 and FUS
We previously provided evidence that the insolubility of hnRNP H in C9ALS brains was due to formation of aggregated assemblies with long, repetitive, G quadruplex-forming RNA (Conlon et al., 2016). However, in the sporadic cases analyzed here, the source of hnRNP H insolubility/aggregation is unknown. To investigate this question, and to understand the significance of the observed gradient of hnRNP H insolubility and splicing dysregulation, we considered the possibility that it is related to insolubilities of other proteins with similar functions and/or domain structures. For example, as mentioned above, TDP-43 displays histopathological evidence of cytoplasmic accumulation/aggregation in virtually all ALS cases. Is this relevant to the biochemical insolubility we observed with hnRNP H?

To measure insolubilities of more protein targets, including TDP-43, we selected a subset of 20 patients: the 10 most like-control and the 10 most like-C9, based on highest and lowest CSS, respectively (and omitting cases where motor cortex was unavailable for fractionation) (Figure 3a). First, to demonstrate clearly the gradient pattern of these samples for hnRNP H insolubility, we performed simultaneous WB of all 20 samples and each of the three fractions (soluble, sarkosyl soluble and sarkosyl insoluble) (Figure 3b). We also performed splicing analysis of a new hnRNP H-regulated target, ACHE (Nazim et al., 2017), further illustrating the relationship between hnRNP H insolubility and splicing dysregulation (Figure 3c).

10.7554/eLife.37754.006Figure 3. Insolubility of hnRNP H correlates with insolubility of additional RBPs.
(a) CSS scores and identifiers for 10 most like-control and 10 most like-C9 patients for which motor cortex was available. These patients were loaded in this descending order for all parts of this figure. (b) Fractionation (180,000 x G) of 20 sALS-FTD patients blotted for hnRNP H. SOL = soluble, SS = sarkosyl soluble and SI = sarkosyl insoluble. (c) Left: gel of ACHE alternative splicing in 20 sALS-FTD patients, loaded in order of highest to lowest CSS. PCR products are identified at right. Right: diagram of primers used and hnRNP H binding motif. (d) Fractionation shown in (b) with western blotting for the following targets (clockwise from upper-left): TDP-43, FUS, GAPDH, hnRNP A1. Each target is shown with three panels representing SOL, SS and SI, from top to bottom. (e) Quantification of percent insoluble protein (180,000 x G) in these 20 cases, with replicate values. Error bars are plotted to the SEM. (t test p value: *=0.05, **=<0.01, ***=<0.0001, ****=<0.0001). (f) Linear regression of percent insoluble hnRNP H, TDP-43, FUS, hnRNP A1 and GAPDH for 20 sALS-FTD patients, plotted against CSS. R-square is listed in legend.

Having established these 20 cases as representative of the hnRNP H gradient, we used the motor cortex fractions derived from them for WB for three other ALS/FTD-implicated hnRNPs: TDP-43, FUS (also known as hnRNP P2), and hnRNP A1 (Figure 3d). These proteins all belong to a common yet dynamic interactome (Markmiller et al., 2018); FUS has been reported to interact with hnRNP H (Reber et al., 2016) and hnRNP A1 (Kim et al., 2013), while hnRNP A1 has been reported to interact cooperatively with hnRNP H to modulate splice site selection (Fisette et al., 2010). Likewise, TDP-43 was shown to interact with the structurally related hnRNP A1 to repress exon inclusion (Buratti et al., 2005) and has also been suggested to self-associate (Polymenidou et al., 2011; Tollervey et al., 2011) to influence a set of targets it shares with FUS (Lagier-Tourenne et al., 2012). As a control, we also blotted for GAPDH, which seemed unlikely to be insoluble.

Strikingly, for each RBP target we found significant increases in insoluble protein in the like-C9s, matched by significant decreases in soluble protein (Figure 3e). Indeed, no insoluble FUS could be detected in any like-control patient, while it was present in all of the like-C9s (between 6.1 and 69.1%). Intriguingly, we found that the correlations between CSS and percentage insoluble protein for hnRNP H, TDP-43, FUS and hnRNP A1 each fit remarkably well to a line (r-square = 0.89, 0.79. 80 and 0.90, respectively) (Figure 3f). Analysis of GAPDH revealed no insoluble protein in any of the 20 cases (Figure 3e) confirming that insolubility of these RBPs was not due to an artifact of fractionation or global protein insolubility in like-C9s.

The above results were unanticipated, and we therefore wished to examine properties of the insoluble fractions further. One possibility was that the high force (180,000 x G) used to generate the sarkosyl insoluble fractions might have resulted in an artificial enrichment of RBPs in the pellet of some patients, and thus, the similar insolubilities of these targets may not reflect physiological interactions. To examine this, we decreased the sedimentation force we used to isolate the aggregated proteins, by separating the sarkosyl insoluble pellet at 21,000 x G for 15 min instead of 180,000 x G for 30 min. We performed simultaneous fractionation and WB of the 20 cases described above, and expanded our targets beyond hnRNP H, TDP-43, hnRNP A1 and FUS to include three additional proteins that we would not expect a priori to be insoluble: Histone H3, C9ORF72 itself and splicing factor U2AF65. We also included one more target protein with broad relevance to MN disease, SMN, which has been reported to interact with RBPs in the context of RNA transport granules (Hua and Zhou, 2004; Thomas et al., 2011; Murakami et al., 2015).

The results of this analysis confirm and extend the observations we made with the 180,000 x G fractionation. They support the idea that the insolubility we initially described for hnRNP H (Figure 4a) extends to other MN disease-related proteins (Figure 4b–e), but is not a general property of like-C9 brains. The non-disease associated proteins (Figure 4f and g) did not display any insolubility, except for U2AF65 (Figure 4h), which had low levels of insoluble protein in six of ten like-C9s, or 9.2% on average (Figure 4i). Intriguingly, a fraction of SMN was insoluble in all the like-C9 cases with a range from 8.1–61.8%, or 31.1% on average, but in none of the like-controls. For comparison, hnRNP H and hnRNP A1 were insoluble in like-C9s with a range from 16.0 to 77.5% and 29.4 to 94.7% (Figure 4i). Despite the important role of SMN in snRNP assembly, and thus in splicing per se, its relatively low average insolubility in like-C9s suggests it is only partially deficient and thus present at levels sufficient to facilitate snRNP assembly, and far higher than levels seen in SMA (Lefebvre et al., 1997). The low levels of U2AF65 and presence of the four abundant hnRNP proteins in the insoluble fraction is supportive of the like-C9s having alterations in the soluble concentration of a limited set of auxiliary splicing factors, yet maintaining sufficient concentrations of the core factors necessary for splicing.

10.7554/eLife.37754.007Figure 4. Like-control ALS/FTD patients have undetectable levels of insoluble RBPs after low-speed fractionation.
(a–h) Low-speed (21,000 x G) fractionation experiment with 20 patients listed in Figure 3a. Western blot hnRNP H (a), TDP-43 (b), FUS (c), hnRNP A1 (d), SMN (e), Histone H3 (f), C9ORF72 (g), U2AF65 (h). SOL = soluble, SS = sarkosyl soluble, SI = sarkosyl insoluble. (i) Quantification of low-speed centrifugation of 20 patients with replicate values. Error bars are plotted to the SEM. (j) Linear regression of percent insoluble protein for targets in (a–h) plotted against CSS. R-square is listed. (k) Heatmap of spearman correlation coefficients for each pairwise comparison of percent insoluble protein at 180,000 or 21,000 x G (180 k and21k, respectively). (l) Western blots of hnRNP H (top) and TDP-43 (bottom) following IP with protein A/G magnetic beads alone, TDP-43 antibody, or control (FLAG) antibody from two patient brains (F5 and F11). The abbreviations ms and rb stand for mouse antibody and rabbit antibody, respectively. Protein species are indicated by arrows at right, and positions of size markers are shown on the left.

10.7554/eLife.37754.008Figure 4—figure supplement 1. Insoluble hnRNP H and TDP-43 correlate in C9 patient brains.
Representative western blot of 21,000 x G motor cortex fractionation from eight controls (six nonALS and two SOD1 ALS) and 14 C9+ ALS/FTD patients. Membranes are shown from top-bottom: cortex homogenate (western blot actin), Sarkosyl insoluble fraction (western blot hnRNP H), and same membrane (western blot TDP-43), with arrows differentiating TDP-43 from residual hnRNP H signal.



10.7554/eLife.37754.009Figure 4—figure supplement 2. Quanitification of TDP-43 splicing targets.
Summary quantification of rt-PCR of 18 TDP-43 splicing targets with six most like-control (highest CSS) and six most like-C9 (lowest CSS) patients. Signifcant events, using a more permissive cutoff (p<0.10, t test) are indicated with a bracket that is pink if the direction of change indicates TDP-43 LOF in like-C9, or blue and dashed if the direction of change indicates TDP-43 LOF in like-control. (p value: *=0.05, **=<0.01, ***=<0.0001, ****=<0.0001; values between 0.05 and 0.10 are displayed numerically).



Reciprocal insolubilities of hnRNP H and TDP-43 reveal TDP-43 LOF is exclusive to like-C9s
The similarity between hnRNP H and TDP-43 insolubilities in the like-C9 samples suggests that a common process or factor may be functioning to bring about their aggregation to correspondingly severe degrees. Supporting this idea, insolubility of each protein displayed an inverse relationship with CSS (Figure 4j), and correlation analysis of the measured insolubilities of all these RBPs (at both 180,000 and 21,000 x G) amongst this set of 20 patients revealed highly significant correlation for each pairwise combination (Figure 4k). The top pairwise combinations between different proteins were between hnRNP H and TDP-43 at both 180,000 and 21,000 x G (Figure 4k; Spearman r = 0.95 for both). Supporting the idea that primary insolubility of hnRNP H can drive insolubility of these other factors, we performed fractionation at 21,000 x G with 13 C9 patients and found similar correlation between hnRNP H and TDP-43 (Spearman r = 0.71) (Figure 4—figure supplement 1).

One explanation for the similar degrees of hnRNP H and TDP-43 insolubility in the sporadic and C9 patient brains is that they coexist in the same physical aggregates. To test this hypothesis, we performed co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) of hnRNP H from eluates of the sarkosyl insoluble pellets of two like-C9 brains using a TDP-43 antibody for IP (see Materials and methods). Indeed, TDP-43 antibody successfully co-IPed hnRNP H, while a negative control antibody (FLAG-M2) or beads alone did not (Figure 4l). These results support a reciprocal relationship between insolubility of hnRNP H and TDP-43, whereby aggregates initially seeded by one protein can recruit the other, and vice versa.

The possibility that a reciprocal relationship exists between hnRNP H and TDP-43 prompted us to consider that insoluble TDP-43 is upstream of hnRNP H insolubility in like-C9s cases. Etiologically, this is appealing, since hallmark TDP-43 histopathology is presumed to reflect underlying biochemical insolubility, and aggregation of TDP-43 into this non-functional and/or mislocalized state is often given as a rationale for mechanistic studies that have sought evidence for TDP-43 LOF (Polymenidou et al., 2011; Lagier-Tourenne et al., 2012; Ling et al., 2015). However, our data present a significant contradiction of this tenet, as 21,000 x G fractionation revealed TDP-43 to be, on average, only 5.3% insoluble in the 10 like-control patients. Meanwhile, 10 patients that were on the same clinical and pathological spectrum yet classified as like-C9 had on average almost eight times as much insoluble TDP-43 (40.8 versus 5.3%, t test p<0.0001) (Figure 4j). Fractionation of the same samples at 180,000 x G revealed a majority of TDP-43 to be insoluble in like-C9s (68.2%) compared to a minority in like-controls (25.2%; p<0.0001; Figure 3e).

The above differential TDP-43 insolubility is in sharp contrast with the much more uniform histopathology. Of the 23 sporadic cases for which we possessed data for pathological analysis by immunohistochemistry with TDP-43 antibodies, only two were found to lack detectable TDP-43 inclusions in motor regions (Supplementary file 1A). One of these, s30, was a like-control case, while the other, F10, was the most like-C9 case (lowest CSS), and had an average of 61.8% insoluble TDP-43 based upon two measurements at 180,000 and 21,000 x G each (Figures 3f and 4i, respectively). Conversely, case 36 had only 2.3% insoluble TDP-43 based upon two measurements at 180,000 and 21,000 x G each (Figures 3f and 4i, respectively), yet TDP-43 pathology was indeed evident (Supplementary file 1A).

The above observation suggests that insolubility of TDP-43, as well as hnRNP H, is not related to TDP-43 histopathology. Given that hnRNP H insolubility is correlated with splicing dysfunction of a set of validated targets, we next asked whether TDP-43 LOF-associated splicing changes also occurred more in the like-C9 cases than in like-controls. To assay TDP-43-dependent splicing, we selected targets from previously published TDP-43 knockdown (KD) and CLIP studies (Tollervey et al., 2011) and analyzed them as above by 32P RT-PCR (Figure 4—figure supplement 2). For 18 targets that produced appropriate products, we compared the percent inclusion values from the six most like-control and six most like-C9 patients (six highest and lowest CSS, respectively). Using a t-test for each event, and a more permissive cutoff for statistical significance (p<0.10), we found that 10 of the 18 events displayed significant changes. Of these events, eight were as predicted consistent with the like-C9 group having lower concentrations of functional TDP-43, while the other two displayed the opposite trend. These results suggest that TDP-43-regulated splicing events demonstrate differential exon inclusion amongst sALS/FTD patients with TDP-43 pathology, with the patients demonstrating biochemically insoluble TDP-43 displaying greater TDP-43 LOF.

RNA-sequencing reveals widespread splicing defects that correlate with protein insolubility
Our investigation into splicing dysfunction initially focused specifically on hnRNP H splicing targets. However, the results described thus far imply that the splicing changes due to decreased levels of functional hnRNP H are complemented by shortages of other RBPs such as TDP-43. We therefore analyzed transcriptome-wide splicing on a larger cohort of patients (28 sALS/FTD cases described above for which hnRNP H solubility and clinical data was available and an additional 13 confirmed C9ALS/FTD cases) using RNA-seq of RNA purified from cerebellum. As controls, we used a combined group of six neurologically normal individuals and five SOD1-ALS individuals, with only two of these 11 samples coming from our previously categorized control group (Supplementary file 1A). The decision to include SOD1 in the control group was made because SOD1-ALS represents the only known form of ALS marked by the absence of TDP-43 (or FUS) inclusions (Mackenzie et al., 2007).

To analyze splicing patterns globally and without bias, we regrouped the patients in a manner independent of previously measured hnRNP H splicing. Instead, we divided the 28 sALS/FTD patients into three groups based on clinical diagnosis and hnRNP H insolubility: ALS-hnRNP H low insolubility (ALSlow; 7 patients), ALS-hnRNP H high insolubility (ALShigh; 13 patients) and FTD (FTD; 8 patients) (Supplementary file 1A). The first two groups consisted of patients with ALS only, and with measured hnRNP H insolubility being below or above 50%, respectively (Figure 5a). The FTD group consisted of those patients with clinical diagnoses of FTD. Interestingly, this group contained the five most severely like-C9 patients. Of the 11 FTD-MND patients in our cohort that were subjected to RNA-seq, only two, F3 and F7, had insolubility below 50%, and therefore were not included in this analysis, but rather used as test cases to ascertain the predictive power of the clustering with respect to insolubility. A fourth patient group consisted of C9ALS and ALS/FTD patients (C9). The average percentage insoluble hnRNP H (180,000 x G) in each group was 26.4 in ALSlow, 59.4 in C9, 67.3 in ALShigh and 79.6 in FTD (Figure 5b). In order to rule out differential hnRNP H levels in the cerebellum of these patients, we performed WB of tissue from 26 of the samples, and observed that there were no changes in overall hnRNP H abundance between these groups (Figure 5c).

10.7554/eLife.37754.010Figure 5. hnRNP H insolubility defines patient groupings for RNA-sequencing analysis.
(a) Percent insoluble hnRNP H of 28 samples in RNA-seq analysis reveals 50% as a natural boundary between ALSlow (7 patients) and ALShigh (13 samples) samples. Percent insoluble hnRNP H of FTD patients (8 patients) is also shown. (b) RNA-seq groups plotted by CSS and percent insoluble hnRNP H. All samples used in RNA-seq differential splicing (DS) analysis groups are shown. (c) Western blots of hnRNP H (top) and histone H3 (middle) from whole-tissue homogenates from cerebellum of 26/28 samples used in RNA-seq analysis. Two ALShigh cases (s1 and s20) were excluded in order to fit all samples on one gel. Grayscale heatmap displays percent insoluble hnRNP H (bottom). (d) Venn diagram of all splicing events found to be significantly different between each patient RNA-seq group and the combined control/SOD1ALS group with PSI magnitude filtering (|∆PSI| ≥ 0.1). (e) Heatmap of all events in (d), except for the 6576 events found to have significant DS exclusively in FTD. Blue-red color scale represents Z-score for normalized PSI. Four rows above heatmap display whether each sample was included in the groupings used for the identification of DS events, termed 'In analysis' (black = yes, white = no), gender (pink = female, blue = male), Patient subtype (see key), and percent insolubility hnRNP H (180,000 x G), ranging from light (low insolubility) to dark (high insolubility) gray. Yellow is shown for cases without insolubility data. Patients are arranged by subtype, with increasing insolubility from left to right, where data is available.

10.7554/eLife.37754.011Figure 5—figure supplement 1. DS events without filtering.
Venn diagram of all events found to be significantly different between each group and the combined control/SOD1ALS group with no PSI magnitude filtering.



We next compared differential splicing (DS) events in each of the four patient groups to the controls. For this analysis, we used the annotation-free method Leafcutter (Li et al., 2018). Variations in intron splicing were considered significant in ALS/FTD when the Percentage Spliced Index (PSI) compared to control differed by more than 10% (|∆PSI| ≥ 0.1) with a 10% FDR cutoff (see Materials and methods). To confirm our assumption that neurological normal and SOD1 ALS could be grouped as one, we compared these two groups and indeed found very few (23) detectable splicing differences (|∆PSI| ≥ 0.1). The paucity of splicing defects in these patients contrasted with 1300–1400 DS events in ALShigh and C9 groups and several thousand in the FTD group (Figure 5d; events listed in Supplementary file 1B), with 488 events overlapping between C9, FTD and ALShigh. Comparison of events without filtering for the magnitude of the change in PSI revealed an even greater proportion of overlapping events between the FTD, C9 and ALShigh groups (Figure 5—figure supplement 1). As validation of our like-C9 nomenclature, with or without filtering respectively, only 27 or 8% of all events detected in C9 were unique to that group; the remainder were detected in ALShigh, FTD or both (like-C9 collectively). Of the remaining 73% of events that were detected in C9 (with filtering), approximately half (48%) were shared with both other groups, while 40 and 12% of events, respectively, were exclusively shared with FTD or ALShigh (Figure 5d). The higher degree of overlap of C9 with FTD likely reflects the fact that with few exceptions, this group had the largest average change in PSI for each event. Furthermore, the ALSlow group had an insignificant number of events, even without filtering, upholding our definition of like-control for splicing in general.

We next wished to visualize the degree of change in splicing of all events by patient. For this, we produced heatmaps of the normalized difference in PSI for all the splicing events that differed significantly between control and any other group (|∆PSI| ≥ 0.1), excluding the very large number of events that differed exclusively between control and FTD (Figure 5d). Patients were organized according to the above groupings, and within each group they were further arranged by increasing hnRNP H insolubility from left to right (Figure 5e, gray-scale) to visualize the relationship between hnRNP H insolubility and changes in splicing. To extend our analysis, we also included 23 additional samples from C9, ALS and FTD patients that were not included in one of the groups above (Supplementary file 1A), creating an additional group of ALS patients (ALS) not categorized as ALSlow or ALShigh.

Hierarchical clustering of splice junctions revealed two distinct groups of events that displayed opposite directions of normalized PSI change in the controls versus the FTDs (Figure 5e). As expected, the ALSlow group was found to be most similar to controls, and the FTD group the most different, reflecting the extreme ends of the insolubility spectrum. Within the C9 and ALShigh groups, the patients displayed a gradient of patterns from low to high insolubility that generally mirrored the pattern of PSI from control to FTD.

We next sought to identify significant splicing changes in our dataset that best correlate with hnRNP H insolubility. We therefore ranked events according to their correlation to insolubility (Supplementary file 1C; 100 most correlated events) and plotted several. The results (Figure 6a) demonstrate that splicing of these transcripts was, as expected, affected by variations in soluble hnRNP H levels. Amongst these correlated events, the relationship to hnRNP H insolubility varied; for example, splicing changes at hnRNPA3 followed a linear relationship similar to BBS, GABRG2 and CCDC136; in turn, splicing changes at hnRNPH1 occurred only when hnRNP H insolubility was above 60%, primarily in FTD patients and some C9 patients. RIOK3 and several of the top 100 most correlated events with hnRNP H insolubility presented exponential trends similar to hnRNPH1 splicing defects. Perhaps this indicates that some events are regulated in compensatory fashions by many factors (see below), and only undergo change in inclusion when soluble levels of multiple RBPs are severely compromised.

10.7554/eLife.37754.012Figure 6. Global splicing differences correlate to hnRNP H insolubility.
(a) Examples of events amongst the 100-most correlated to insolubility, with Leafcutter (LC) PSI plotted on the X-axis and insolubility (%) on the Y-axis. DS events are shown for the following genes (clockwise, from upper left): BBS2, GABRG2, HNRNPA3, HNRNPH1, RIOK3 and CCDC136 (events listed in Supplementary file 1C). (b) Heatmap of 100 events most correlated/anti-correlated (absolute value Spearman coefficient) with hnRNP H insolubility. Blue-red color scale represents Z-score for normalized PSI. Four rows above heatmap display whether each sample was included in the groupings used for the identification of DS events, termed 'In analysis' (black = yes, white = no), gender (pink = female, blue = male), Patient subtype (see key), and percent insolubility hnRNP H (180,000 x G), ranging from light (low insolubility) to dark (high insolubility) gray. Yellow is shown for cases without insolubility data. Patients are arranged by subtype, with increasing insolubility from left to right, where data is available. (c) Gene set enrichment analysis of top 200 dysregulated splicing events correlated to hnRNP H insolubility. (d) Heatmap of significant DS events that occur in a set of common splicing factor genes, simplified to the single most changed event per gene (hnRNPs, SR proteins, ALS-related RBPs or SMN; events listed in Supplementary file 1D). The same four rows apply as in (b). (e) Bar graph depicting that patients like-C9 are 3.8-times more likely to have symptoms of FTD than patients like-control (Fisher’s exact test, Odds ratio (OR) = 3.8, p=0.032).

10.7554/eLife.37754.013Figure 6—figure supplement 1. Events in Figure 6b heatmap as they appear in order.
All coordinates are mapped to GRCh38/hg38.



10.7554/eLife.37754.014Figure 6—figure supplement 2. Events in Figure 6d heatmap as they appear in order.
All coordinates are mapped to GRCh38/hg38.



10.7554/eLife.37754.015Figure 6—figure supplement 3. Heatmap of intersecting events.
Heatmap of 489 (488 between FTD, C9 and ALShigh plus one between all four groups) overlapping events from Figure 5d, with hierarchical clustering. Blue-red color scale represents Z-score for normalized PSI. Four rows above heatmap display whether each sample was included in the groupings used for the identification of DS events, termed 'In analysis' (black = yes, white = no), gender (pink = female, blue = male), patient subtype (see key), and percent insolubility hnRNP H (180,000 x G), ranging from light (low insolubility) to dark (high insolubility) gray. Yellow is shown for cases without insolubility data.



10.7554/eLife.37754.016Figure 6—figure supplement 4. Heatmap of subtype-specific DS events.
Heatmap of non-intersecting events (Figure 5d) comprised of the top 20 events (magnitude |∆PSI|) from each group (FTD, C9, ALShigh), and all three events from ALSlow. Patients are arranged according to vertical dendogram. Blue-red color scale represents Z-score for normalized difference in PSI. Four rows above heatmap display whether each sample was included in the groupings used for the identification of DS events, termed 'In analysis' (black = yes, white = no), gender (pink = female, blue = male), Patient subtype (see key), and percent insolubility hnRNP H (180,000 x G), ranging from light (low insolubility) to dark (high insolubility) gray. Yellow is shown for cases without insolubility data.



10.7554/eLife.37754.017Figure 6—figure supplement 5. A model for a multi-RBP proteinopathy and splicing dysregulation as a common mechanism underling ALS/FTD pathogenesis.
A model of a multi-RBP proteinopathy, where several disease-related proteins (hnRNP H, TDP-43, FUS, hnRNP A1) can exist in different states: free/soluble, phase separated into reversible granules, and trapped in overly mature granules or aggregated RNA/protein assemblies. The relative balance of these states can be influenced by known ALS/FTD mutations, or normal fluctuations due to experience, thus altering the cellular distribution of RBPs between diffuse and localized/sequestered states. We envision a theoretical ‘toxicity boundary’ beyond which RBPs are disproportionately in the highly concentrated state, and functional levels of soluble protein are low. We propose that the distance past this boundary, or magnitude of the imbalance between free and local RBP concentrations, is correlated to a greater involvement of cortical neuron dysfunction, whereas mild imbalance is sufficient only to cause MN death. Thus our model implies a gradient in vulnerability, with spinal MNs being more sensitive to this imbalance than cortical MNs, which are more vulnerable than neurons (such as spindle/VE (Von economo)) that are predominantly affected in FTD.



Broadly, the 100 events with the highest correlation with hnRNP H insolubility displayed variable splicing strength (intron exclusion ratios) across the cohort (Figure 6b; events listed in Figure 6—figure supplement 1), analogous to the pattern seen for all events (Figure 5e). Notably, among the highly correlated DS events were many in transcripts encoding RBPs (Figure 6c), such as splicing regulators, which generally followed the same pattern of PSI changes relative to insolubility in each group (Figure 6d; heatmap events listed in Figure 6—figure supplement 2; all events listed in Supplementary file 1D). Interestingly, several of the events found to affect RBPs (FUS exon 7, hnRNP A1 exon 8, hnRNP D exon 7 and TIA-1 exon 5) have been the subject of intensive inquiry for their potential roles in disease (Deshaies et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2013) as well regulating splicing and interactions with other hnRNPs (Gueroussov et al., 2017; Izquierdo and Valcárcel, 2007). This observation raises the possibility that insolubility of the disease-associated RBPs leads to specific alterations in RNA splicing that compound defects in those same RBPs and others, thereby exacerbating the magnitude and extent of splicing dysregulation (see Discussion).

Beyond the RBPs, several of the DS events were consistent with possible direct roles in disease pathology. One especially noteworthy example was the increased skipping of MAPT exon 10, observed in C9, ALShigh and FTD (Supplementary file 1B). Alternative inclusion of this exon perturbs a delicate balance between 3-repeat and 4-repeat Tau, and genetic mutations in exon 10 or the surrounding intron are a significant cause of familial FTD (Ghetti et al., 2015). While it is compelling to think that specific splicing changes could drive disease pathologies, the myriad of biologically interesting events suggests caution in attributing too much meaning to any individual event.

We next recapitulated this stratification of patient groups using hierarchical clustering. Using the 489 differential events that were common to all groups (488 common to ALShigh, C9 and FTD, and one common to ALSlow as well) (Figure 6—figure supplement 3), patients with similar insolubility measurements were grouped close to one another. To further support the hypothesis that all DS events are due to insolubility and not particular clinical distinctions, clustering of patients based on the top events that were unique to each grouping (20 from each ALShigh, C9 and FTD, and all three events in ALSlow) also ordered the patients according to insolubility (Figure 6—figure supplement 4). Regardless of whether clustering was performed with either the most shared (Figure 6—figure supplement 3) or the most divergent (Figure 6—figure supplement 4) events, the two groups separated by the farthest distance contained almost exactly the same patients, whereas the controls (neurological normal and SOD1) clustered together with the patients with the lowest insolubility, including samples not in the original ALSlow group. In summary, we conclude that widespread, global splicing differences occur in ALS and FTD, and these can be explained by biochemical insolubility of RBPs, with corresponding severity across distinct brain regions.

Like-C9 patients have a higher incidence of FTD
In the above analysis based on solubility groupings, the FTD samples were noteworthy in that they displayed the highest hnRNP H insolubility, as well as the most numerous and acute PSI changes. However, several sporadic and C9 ALS patients with high insolubility had similar DS patterns, implying that the excessive events were not somehow specific to the FTD clinical diagnosis, but rather the result of exceptionally high insolubility of RBPs, which occurs at a greater rate in FTD than ALS. This suggests a possible relationship between patients identified as like-C9 and FTD.

To determine if like C9-patients were indeed more likely to be diagnosed with FTD, we returned to our initial assignments of like-C9 and like-control. Of the 50 patients in this analysis, 18 had symptoms of FTD, and were clinically diagnosed with either ALS-FTD or pure FTD, while the remaining 32 patients were diagnosed with ALS without cognitive or behavioral impairment. The majority (13/18; 72%) of the patients characterized by symptoms of FTD were like-C9, while only five of the patients with FTD symptoms were like-control. We compared these ratios using a Fisher’s exact test, and found that like-C9 patients were on average 3.8 times more likely to have symptoms of FTD versus like-control patients (Figure 6e, p=0.032). Strikingly, these findings mirror what has been reported for C9 patients, who are approximately four times more likely than the ALS population at large to receive a diagnosis of FTD (Byrne et al., 2012). Thus we conclude that this distinction of like-C9 based upon splicing and accompanying biochemical insolubility confers clinical susceptibility to FTD, just as occurs in authentic C9ALS patients.

Discussion
In this study, we have characterized a diverse cohort of ALS/FTD patient brains and identified a signature of graded splicing dysregulation that correlates in magnitude with insolubility of several abundant and disease-relevant RBPs. Our work provides evidence that aberrant alternative splicing is a common molecular feature of C9ALS/FTD and sporadic ALS/FTD patients, and importantly, that these changes reflect underlying biochemical changes that manifest in RBP aggregation. A unified vision of what causes ALS and FTD at the molecular levels has remained highly speculative despite great advances in our understanding of the genetics that contribute to this disease spectrum (Taylor et al., 2016). Thus, our work is significant in that it provides a compelling case for the existence of a shared biochemical mechanism that occurs in ALS, FTD and ALS/FTD, and which can be rationalized in the context of other known disease mutations and pathologies.

RNA splicing defects have previously been reported in C9ALS (Conlon et al., 2016) and sporadic ALS/FTD (Ling et al., 2015; Prudencio et al., 2015). However, in the absence of mechanistic insights into the origins of these defects in sporadic patients, the assumed culprit has been TDP-43 deficiency, reflecting the almost universal observation of TDP-43 histopathology (Polymenidou et al., 2011; Lagier-Tourenne et al., 2012; Ling et al., 2015). Through stratification of patient samples based on biochemical insolubility of hnRNP H, and by extension TDP-43, we found that TDP-43 pathology is not sufficient to confer detectable splicing differences relative to neurologically normal controls or SOD1 ALS patients. Thus, our data suggest a model (Figure 6—figure supplement 5) in which TDP-43 is just one of several affected RBPs. Our finding that biochemical insolubility of TDP-43 correlates with splicing defects as well as with insolubility of several other RBPs casts doubt on the TDP-43-centric view of ALS (Lagier-Tourenne and Cleveland, 2009; Scotter et al., 2015). Given the decoupling of visible pathology from biochemical insolubility, with only the latter correlated with splicing dysregulation, our results strongly suggest that ALS/FTD should be considered a multiRBP proteinopathy rather than a TDP-43 proteinopathy.

The fact that approximately half of sporadic ALS/FTD patient brains do not display significant splicing defects or insoluble protein seemingly contradicts our assertion that this is the common mechanism underlying disease. One possibility is that an entirely distinct mechanism drives neurodegeneration in these patients, perhaps one similar to SOD1ALS in which soluble hnRNP H and splicing profiles resemble neurologically normal controls. Alternatively, the range of abnormality in sALS patients we observed may reflect what we detected in C9ALS/FTD (Conlon et al., 2016). Specifically, some C9 patients displayed severe splicing changes, while others were indistinguishable from normal controls. One possible explanation for this is that in both C9s and sporadic cases, some patients display these changes only on a limited scale. For example, splicing and insolubility changes may be confined to only the most vulnerable cell types in patients (sporadic and C9) that were modestly different from control. As a result, changes in splicing or solubility that occur in a minority subpopulation of cells could be diluted in bulk studies by more numerous transcripts derived from unaffected cell types. A future goal will be to try to investigate whether such specific splicing events indeed exist that are unique or disproportionately relevant to affected neuronal populations.

Another interpretation of our data is that detectable splicing changes and highly insoluble protein levels may only become evident in the later stages of a progressive coalescence of RBPs (Lin et al., 2015; Murakami et al., 2015; Patel et al., 2015). In such a model, splicing changes, while undoubtedly contributory, may not be the sole, or critical, event driving disease onset or progression, but rather a consequence of perturbations in the equilibrium of soluble versus aggregated RBPs (Figure 6—figure supplement 5). Many studies of ALS/FTD disease mechanisms have focused on a complex equilibrium between differentially concentrated RBPs in physically distinct phases. Importantly, many factors, including mutations known to cause disease (Kim et al., 2013; Murakami et al., 2015; Patel et al., 2015; Martinez et al., 2016; Fay et al., 2017; Mackenzie et al., 2017), are capable of influencing the balance between protein concentrations in each phase over time (Ramaswami et al., 2013). Our model (Figure 6—figure supplement 5) proposes that all ALS/FTD patients fall at varying points beyond a hypothetical ‘toxicity boundary’ that would be analogous to the phase boundaries that describe physiological granule formation (Weber and Brangwynne, 2012; Elbaum-Garfinkle et al., 2015), only unidirectional. The magnitude of this imbalance, or position past a theoretical tipping point, would thus be related to increased abundance of biochemically insoluble protein and decreased levels of functional RBPs, leading to aberrant splicing.

The above model depicts RBP insolubility as lying upstream of splicing defects. However, it is worth considering the possibility that splicing changes lead to, or at least contribute to, insolubility. Notably, two events found to affect the RBPs hnRNP D and hnRNP A1 (exons 7 and 8, respectively) have been shown to cause inclusion of glycine-tyrosine (GY)-rich intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) in their respective proteins (Gueroussov et al., 2017). In our analysis, we observed increased inclusion of hnRNP D exon 7, leading to an isoform with an extended GY-rich region that makes increased contacts with other hnRNPs, thereby potentially promoting overly stable RBP complexes. Inclusion of hnRNP A1 exon 8 also extends its IDR, although the difference in the number of GY-repeats is not as strong as for hnRNP D (Gueroussov et al., 2017). Somewhat surprisingly, hnRNP A1 exon 8 was found in our data to be more skipped as RBP insolubility increased, which seems to contradict a recent study suggesting that reduced levels of TDP-43 promote inclusion of this exon (Deshaies et al., 2018). In contrast, the loss of soluble FUS, which regulates its own transcript, may explain FUS splicing defects in our data. Normally, FUS protein represses inclusion of exon 7, leading to a FUS isoform that undergoes nonsense-mediated decay in a self-regulating loop (Zhou et al., 2013). Thus, it may be that reduced levels of soluble FUS lead to the observed increase in exon 7 inclusion, thereby resulting in excess levels of FUS that either seed RBP aggregates or ‘pile on’ to existing ones. Such a mechanism, whereby splicing changes affecting one or a few RBPs act as ‘drivers’ of RBP aggregation, can also be envisioned for other events in our analysis, for example, hnRNP H1, which we found undergoes differential splicing in its gly-rich IRD. Regardless of whether insolubility is upstream of splicing changes, or splicing changes precipitate insolubility, these events, and likely others, highlight how the two processes may reinforce one another in a vicious cycle, ultimately leading to the severe insolubility/splicing dysregulation we have documented in the like-C9 ALS and FTD cases.

If all ALS-FTD indeed converges on the same mechanism then what factors dictate the onset and progression of disease at the clinical level? This is not straightforward, even when a known mutation underlies disease. In the case of C9, understanding how a single genetic polymorphism can lead to two different disorders, or a combination of the two, is perplexing. Further complicating matters, the C9 expansion has been associated with scarce disease incidence in a wide spectrum of neurodegenerative and psychiatric conditions, including Huntington’s Disease, Parkinson’s Disease, and Schizophrenia (Hensman Moss et al., 2014; Lesage et al., 2013; McLaughlin et al., 2017). It is unclear if these different patterns of neuronal degeneration reflect intra-patient variation in toxic burden across cell types/brain regions (Mackenzie et al., 2014), or if particular cell-types have inherently lower tolerance to toxic threats that are uniform across an individual (Nijssen et al., 2017). It may be that a combination of burden mosaicism and varying toxicity thresholds of distinct cell types converge to affect disease progression, such that mutation alone cannot predict the disease course of a given individual (Van Mossevelde et al., 2017). In our C9 model, these hypothetical burdens may be manifested and/or enhanced by transcriptional activity of the expanded locus (Liu et al., 2014), heightened ratio of aggregated to soluble hnRNP H, and increasingly severe splicing changes. For sALS/FTD, we know the latter two occur, but as of yet, what triggers this remains a mystery.

The variation in disease severity implied in our model also suggests a natural progression of disease from ALS to FTD along this clinical spectrum. Our results suggest that FTD patients are further past this hypothetical boundary than are patients with pure ALS, as reflected by the highest values of RBP insolubility, and most global splicing changes. Given that all of the patients in our cohort with FTD also displayed MN loss, but not all ALS patients displayed signs of frontal cortex deterioration, we propose that the distinct neuronal populations affected by this disease spectrum have differential vulnerabilities to the alterations in granule dynamics that define the toxicity boundary. The heightened sensitivity of spinal MNs implied by this gradient parallels what is known about SMA, a disease where subtle alterations in the concentration of the protein SMN cause highly specific degeneration of spinal MNs, with further increasing deficiency in SMN resulting in wider systemic dysfunction (Tu et al., 2017). In both cases, disease mechanisms have been suggested to converge on perturbations of granule dynamics (Zhang et al., 2006; Shan et al., 2010; Ishihara et al., 2013) and RNA splicing (Tsuiji et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2008).

The observation that defects in mRNA splicing may have relevance to ALS was made 20 years ago, through examination of the disease-relevant EAAT2 gene product (Lin et al., 1998). In retrospect, our findings shed new light on the observation that splicing changes could be found region-specifically, and in most, but not all, sporadic patients. In addition to providing a potential mechanistic basis for this observation, our data can fit it into a broader mechanistic context that correlates changes in mRNA splicing with changes in RBP solubility. While the ubiquity of TDP-43 pathology to ALS/FTD, and the protein’s known roles in RNA processing, brought RNA biology to the forefront of research on these diseases, we now conclude that RNA processing defects are not simply correlated to visible pathology. Nonetheless, the microscopically invisible fluctuations in RBP concentration that we have described biochemically imply that this complex spectrum of disease states can be reached through many paths, some genetically mediated, some potentially driven by environment and experience. Our discovery that a large fraction of all ALS/FTD is characterized by a ‘like-C9’ signature and reflects a ‘multiRBP proteinopathy’ thus provides a unifying theme for these complex and lethal diseases.

Materials and methods
Key resources table Reagent type (species) 
or resource	Designation	Source or reference	Identifiers	Additional information	
Biological sample 
(human)	Patient brains samples	NA	All identifiers are provided 
in Supplementary file 1A		
Antibody	hnRNP H (rabbit)	Bethyl, A300-511			
Antibody	hnRNP H (rabbit, Co-IP)	ThermoFisher, PA5-27610			
Antibody	TDP-43 (rabbit)	Proteintech, 10782–2-AP			
Antibody	TDP-43 human specific 
(mouse)	Proteintech, 60019–2-Ig			
Antibody	hnRNP A1 (mouse)	Sigma, 4B10			
Antibody	FUS (mouse)	Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, H-6			
Antibody	GAPDH (rabbit)	Sigma, G9545			
Antibody	U2AF65 (mouse)	Sigma, U4758			
Antibody	SMN (mouse)	Sigma, S2944			
Antibody	Histone H3 (rabbit)	Abcam, 1791			
Antibody	FLAG-M2 (mouse)	Sigma, F1804			
Antibody	Actin (rabbit)	Sigma, A2066			
Antibody	C9ORF72 (rabbit)	Novus, 1086CGP			
Software, algorithm	Leafcutter		Li et al. (2018)		
Acquisition of patient materials
Human patient brains were donated for research by next of kin. Samples were acquired from the New York Brain Bank. C9 expansion testing was performed by repeat-primed PCR in the Clinical Pathology lab of Columbia University Medical Center. All available clinical and pathological records were collected and used to summarize patient demographics and disease features. Additional samples were obtained by the New York Genome Center as part of the Target ALS post-mortem core.

RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted from patient cerebellum, polyA selected, reverse-transcribed, and amplified by 32P-PCR for 33 cycles with established primers as previously described (Conlon et al., 2016). Products were electrophoresed side-by-side on 6% native PAGE and exposed to phosphor. Percent inclusions were measured using ImageQuant, and replicate data from two independent RNA extractions per sample were graphed and analyzed with Graphpad for Prism. All primer sequences for hnRNP H (Conlon et al., 2016) and TDP-43 (Tollervey et al., 2011) targets were previously published. Primer sequences (5’−3’) for ACHE are as follows: 4F: GAACCGCTTCCTCCCCAAATT; 5aR: CAGCCTCCCCATGGGTGAA; 5bR: GTGGAACTCGGCCTTCCACT.

Biochemical fractionation
Biochemical fractionation using Sarkosyl-containing buffers was performed as previously described (Conlon et al., 2016), with 21,000 x g centrifugation (15 minutes) substituted for 180,000 x g (30 minutes) where indicated. All three fractions, soluble, sarkosyl soluble and sarkosyl insoluble, were western blotted simultaneously, and the band intensities of each fraction were quantified using ImageJ from a single exposure.

Western blotting
Western blotting was performed as previously described (Conlon et al., 2016). Antibodies used in include Actin (Sigma, A2066), hnRNP H (Bethyl, A300-511), TDP-43 (Proteintech, 10782–2-AP), FUS (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, H-6), GAPDH (Sigma, G9545), hnRNP A1 (Sigma, 4B10), Histone H3 (Abcam, 1791), SMN (Sigma, S2944), U2AF65 (Sigma, U4758), C9ORF72 (Novus, 1086CGP), FLAG-M2 (Sigma, F1804). All primary antibodies were incubated in Pierce Protein-free blocking buffer.

Co-Immunoprecipitation
Fractionation was performed as described (Conlon et al., 2016) with the following exceptions: after the 180,000 x g centrifugation, the insoluble pellet was washed briefly with milliQ water, then incubated in 20 mM Tris, 100 mM KCl (supplemented with 10 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 10 μg/ml each of aprotinin, leupeptin and pepstatin [a/l/p]) equal to 5% the volume of the Sarksosyl soluble-fraction. The pellet was incubated with rotation for 24 hr at 4°C, then centrifuged briefly at 5000 x g. One microliter of elutant (without debris) was diluted into a final volume of 50 μl IP buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 10% glycerol with 10 mM PMSF and 10 μg/ml each of a/l/p) with either 0.5 ug TDP-43 antibody (Proteintech, 60019–2-Ig), 0.5 μg FLAG-M2 antibody (Sigma) or nothing, and incubated at 4°C for 60–100 min with rotation. One ul of input was removed and stored at 4°C. Protein A/G beads (Pierce; 10 μl per sample) were washed three times with 1 mL IP buffer, the resuspended in 25 μl IP buffer. Beads were then mixed with the 50 μl sample, and incubated for 16–24 hr at 4°C with rotation. Supernatants were separated from beads on a magnetic stand, and beads were washed three times with 1 mL high-salt IP buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 10% glycerol with 10 mM PMSF and 10 μg/ml each of a/l/p), with 5 min rotation at 4°C with each wash. Beads were centrifuged briefly (<10 s) at 500 x g after the third wash, and residual liquid was fully removed. Beads were eluted for 5–8 min with 100 mM glycine, pH 2.0 at room temperature, then immediately neutralized with 100 mM Tris pH 10.0. The eluent was mixed with 4X SDS sample buffer, boiled, electrophoresed by 8% SDS-PAGE, and western blotted with hnRNP H (ThermoFisher, PA5-27610) and TDP-43 (Proteintech, 10782–2-AP) antibodies.

RNA-sequencing
Total RNA was extracted from flash-frozen post-mortem cerebellum tissue in Trizol/Chloroform and purified using a Qiagen RNeasy minikit column. Starting form 500 ng total RNA input, rRNA depletion and library preparation were performed according to the manufacturer’s conditions using the KAPA Stranded RNA-Seq Kit with RiboErase and unique Illumina-compatible indexes (NEXTflex RNA-seq Barcodes, BioScientific). Multiplexed libraries 550 bp in length were sequenced PE 125 (Illumina HiSeq 2500).

Computational methods
Forty to sixty million filtered reads were aligned to GRCh38 using STAR (2.5.2a) (Dobin and Gingeras, 2015). Differential splicing analysis was performed using the LeafCutter annotation-free algorithm (Li et al., 2018). The package was implemented with default parameter settings per the author’s recommendations: at least 50 split reads must support the cluster with introns up to 500 kb. Only clusters with p-adjusted <0.1 were considered for further analysis (a lower p-adjusted cutoff proved to be too stringent, with no significant clusters listing for the ALSlow analysis). We used gender as an additional co-variate to prevent events attributable to gender from cluttering the results. Variations in intron splicing were considered significant in ALS/FTD when the Percentage Spliced Index (PSI) compared to control differed by more than 10% (|∆PSI| ≥ 0.1) with 10% FDR cutoff. Differential splicing events were then mapped to gene names to identify events of interest using Gencode version 25.

Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000052NIH Office of the Director
R35 GM 118136 to James L Manley.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000052NIH Office of the Director
5T32GM008798 to Erin G Conlon.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000971Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Association
15-LGCA-234 to Hemali Phatnani.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NIH grant R35 GM 118136 to JLM. EGC was supported in part by NIH training grant 5T32GM008798. RNA sequencing and related analyses at the NYGC were supported by the ALS Association (grant 15-LGCA-234) and the Tow Foundation, which also provided direct support for the Eleanor and Lou Gehrig ALS Center (NAS). We acknowledge the Target ALS postmortem tissue core, as well as the New York Brain Bank for providing us with human brain samples. We thank Dr. Lawrence Honig of the Taub Institute/ADRC for providing FTD samples. We also thank Aarti Sharma and Beatriz Blanco-Redondo for many helpful discussions that helped shape this study.

Additional information
Competing interests
Senior editor, eLife.

No competing interests declared.

Author contributions
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing—original draft.

Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Visualization, Writing—review and editing.

Data curation, Formal analysis, Visualization, Writing—review and editing.

Investigation, Writing—review and editing.

Methodology, Writing—review and editing.

Investigation.

Investigation.

Resources.

Resources, Funding acquisition.

Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Writing—review and editing.

Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Writing—review and editing.

Conceptualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Writing—original draft.

Ethics
Human subjects: Human post-mortem brain samples were donated for research purposes by next of kin.

Additional files
10.7554/eLife.37754.018Supplementary file 1. (A) Patient clinical information. (B) All significant DS events with greater than 10% difference in PSI. All events found to be significantly different between each patient group (FTD, ALShigh, ALSlow, C9) and control (|∆PSI| ≥ 0.1). Events are arranged from greatest to smallest difference in ∆PSI, with ∆PSI values listed. Events without significant change in a given group are denoted with zeroes. All coordinates are mapped to GRCh38/hg38. (C) Significant DS events most correlated to hnRNP H insolubility. Events and spearman rank correlation coefficients are provided. All coordinates are mapped to GRCh38/hg38. (D) Significant DS events occurring in common RBP genes. All events occurring in a set of common splicing factor genes (hnRNPs, SR proteins, ALS-related RBPs or SMN) amongst the events found to be significantly different between each patient group (FTD, ALShigh, ALSlow, C9) and control (no PSI filter). Events without significant change in a given group are denoted with zeroes. All coordinates are mapped to GRCh38/hg38. (E) NYGC ALS Consortium Members.

 10.7554/eLife.37754.019Transparent reporting form  Data availability
All raw RNASeq data from Target ALS samples are immediately made publicly available. Access to the data can be requested by emailing ALSData@nygenome.org. All RNASeq data from the ALS Consortium are made immediately available to all members of the Consortium and with other Consortia with whom we have a reciprocal sharing arrangement. Data have been deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (accession no. GSE116622).

The following dataset was generated:

James L Manley 2018 Data from: Unexpected similarities between C9ORF72 and sporadic forms of ALS/FTD suggest a common disease mechanism http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE116622Publicly available at the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE116622) 

10.7554/eLife.37754.024Decision letter In the interests of transparency, eLife includes the editorial decision letter and accompanying author responses. A lightly edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the most substantive concerns; minor comments are not usually included.

Thank you for submitting your article "Unexpected similarities between C9ORF72 and sporadic forms of ALS/FTD suggest a common disease mechanism" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by three peer reviewers, and the evaluation has been overseen by Douglas Black as the Reviewing Editor, and Kevin Struhl as the Senior Editor The following individuals involved in review of your submission have agreed to reveal their identity: Mani Ramaswami (Reviewer #1); Aaron D Gitler (Reviewer #2).

The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.

Summary:

This study from Conlon et al, is submitted as an advance that extends their previous eLife paper. In the earlier study, the authors examined the GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the C9ORF72 gene that causes ALS, and found that the expanded GGGGCC RNA bound to the splicing regulator hnRNP H. They further showed that the C9 mutation was associated with increased portions of the cellular hnRNP H being found in insoluble aggregates, and that C9 patient brains exhibited changes in splicing consistent with loss of hnRNP H function. ALS is a heterogeneous disease with multiple known causal mutations and with sporadic forms of unknown origin being highly prevalent. ALS is also often found in conjunction with frontal temporal dementia (FTD) and is thought to share a common origin with this and possibly other neurodegenerative disorders. In the new studies, the authors examined autopsied brains from sporadic non-C9 cases of ALS and FTD. Testing a panel of hnRNP H target exons, they identified a subset of cases of sporadic ALS (sALS) and particularly FTD with motor neuron degeneration that exhibit the patterns of splicing of C9 cerebellum. In this subset of sALS patients multiple hnRNP H enhanced exons showed lower inclusion and a few hnRNP H repressed exons showed higher levels of splicing, compared to other sALS patient brains or to control brains. Defining the sALS patients as "like-C9" in their splicing, or "like-control", they examined hnRNP H solubility in the cortices of these two patient groups. They found that in the like-C9 cortex a substantial portion of the hnRNP H was in the sarkosyl-insoluble pellet, and this was not seen in the like-control patient brains. The fraction of hnRNP H found in the sarkosyl pellet correlated strongly with the averaged splicing changes of the H dependent exons. In novel experiments examining the sarkosyl pellet fraction, they found that other RNA binding proteins known to be mutated or otherwise implicated in motor neuron disease also showed greater aggregation in the like-C9 patients compared to the like-control. These included TDP-43, FUS and hnRNP A1, whereas other proteins such as GAPDH were not aggregating. These results were extended by testing more selective pelleting assays and additional proteins to yield similar conclusions that the insolubility of a range of RNA binding proteins seen in ALS brain correlated with the observed splicing changes. The finding of multiple RBP's aggregating in parallel with hnRNP H led to a broader RNAseq assessment of splicing in the cerebelli of a range of ALS/FTD patients. Examining all the exon changes without regard to hnRNP H regulation, the authors found distinct regulatory clusters of splicing events in ALS patients that correlate with RBP aggregation, regardless of disease classification.

These data have several important implications for neurodegenerative disease. They define a subset of sporadic ALS patients with similar features to patients with the C9ORF72 mutation. The protein aggregation seen in C9 and like-C9 patients extends beyond hnRNP H to other RNA binding proteins mutated in other forms of ALS. In an intriguing observation, SMN1, whose loss of function is the cause of another motor neuron disease Spinal Muscular Atrophy, is also seen to aggregate in the like-C9 brains. Also interesting is the differential splicing of many RBP transcripts that the authors speculate could play an additional role in altering the splicing phenotype of ALS brain. Formation of TDP-43 inclusions in the motor cortex and elsewhere has long been used as a histopathological marker of ALS. However, the sarkosyl-insoluble RBP aggregates studied here as markers of like-C9 ALS (and that include TDP-43), were not seen to correlate with the histological TDP-43 inclusions seen across all ALS. These inclusions are speculated to perhaps be late events related to cell death rather than a causal factor in the disease. Direct experimental support for similarities between sporadic and genetic forms of ALS/FTD is important and valuable, and the description of ALS/FTD as RNA-binding proteinopathy instead of only a TDP-43 proteinopathy is an important new concept for the field. The reviewers all found this study to be of broad interest for both neurodegenerative disease and RNA biology, and to be suitable for publication as an eLife Research Advance. Major concerns were largely related to how the data are presented and discussed.

Essential revisions:

1) Throughout the paper and the previous study, the RNAseq analyses of splicing were carried out on cerebellar RNA, while the biochemical analyses of RNA binding protein aggregation used samples from the motor cortex, where the degeneration occurs. The authors cite valid practical reasons for doing the sequencing on cerebellar samples. However, they do not discuss possible implications of carrying out the two analyses on two very different brain regions. They should discuss whether the cerebellum also exhibits degeneration or is also forming the RBP aggregates. If not, they should discuss whether the splicing changes are truly a direct result of the protein aggregation. If the aggregates are formed across all brain regions, is there any cell type specificity to their presence? Are they found in other cells and tissues – similar to the loss of Smn1 in SMA? If they are found across all tissues, it is not clear what model the authors propose for the role of the protein aggregates. Different neurons and neuronal structures exhibit many differences in their gene expression and splicing and there will likely be cerebellar-specific and cortex-specific splicing events that are dependent on the aggregating proteins. If the disease targets motor neurons, shouldn't there be an assessment of the splicing changes in the tissue containing these cells?

2) The authors should also expand on the relationship of their new findings to the original splicing signature reported in 2016. Are the hnRNP H dependent splicing changes and the hnRNP H insolubility in C9 due to the expanded repeat RNAs sequestering hnRNP H? Or is it possible that the C9 aggregation is also caused other alterations in other RBPs that lead to the hnRNP H pathologies? A discussion of this will help readers assess the 2016 C9 data in light of their new findings.

3) Immunoblots for particular RNA binding proteins and other factors indicate that the formation of the aggregates is selective, but it is not clear how selective. Have the authors done shotgun mass spec identification of the proteins in the sarkosyl pellets? How many different proteins are aggregating? Are there other types of proteins in the aggregates besides RNA binders? If the MS data are available, it would potentially clarify several important questions regarding the aggregates and should be presented and discussed.

10.7554/eLife.37754.025Author response Essential revisions:

1) Throughout the paper and the previous study, the RNAseq analyses of splicing were carried out on cerebellar RNA, while the biochemical analyses of RNA binding protein aggregation used samples from the motor cortex, where the degeneration occurs. The authors cite valid practical reasons for doing the sequencing on cerebellar samples. However, they do not discuss possible implications of carrying out the two analyses on two very different brain regions. They should discuss whether the cerebellum also exhibits degeneration or is also forming the RBP aggregates. If not, they should discuss whether the splicing changes are truly a direct result of the protein aggregation.

We agree with the reviewers that is an important issue. We have added the following sentences to the text at the end of the subsection “Like-C9 sALS/FTD display increased hnRNP H insolubility,” and provided new information (referencing “Purkinje Cell loss” status in Supplementary file 1) indicating that the cerebellum also exhibits degeneration.

“The correspondence between hnRNP H’s biochemical solubility and its predicted transcriptomic effects across distal brain regions from the same patients supports the notion that this is an intrinsic, brain-wide property of each patient. Reinforcing this view, we also examined all available post-mortem pathological reports, from 26 of the sporadic ALS/FTD patients. Significantly, 19 of these were noted to exhibit focal loss of Purkinje neurons in the cerebellum (Supplementary file 1), confirming that regions of the brain undergoing robustly measured splicing defects did indeed experience neuronal degeneration. This further justifies our choice to correlate changes measured in the cerebellum with changes in the cortex.”

If the aggregates are formed across all brain regions, is there any cell type specificity to their presence?

This is an interesting question, but in terms of a biochemical analysis (not immunofluorescence) would be virtually impossible to test given currently available methods.

Are they found in other cells and tissues – similar to the loss of Smn1 in SMA? If they are found across all tissues, it is not clear what model the authors propose for the role of the protein aggregates. Different neurons and neuronal structures exhibit many differences in their gene expression and splicing and there will likely be cerebellar-specific and cortex-specific splicing events that are dependent on the aggregating proteins.

This point reflects another facet of the brain’s complexity that we cannot account for properly. We agree that there may be important disease-relevant contributions of splicing events that are specific to particular neuronal subtypes. However, identifying those changes would require a sophisticated analysis of multiple brain regions, or ideally, cell types, from the same patients, which would be further complicated by the comparison of degenerated cell populations in patients to non-degenerated ones in controls. Although we think such an analysis represents an important future direction, it is not something that could be addressed in the current study. However, to acknowledge this important point, we have added the following sentences to the Discussion section.

“One possible explanation for this is that in both C9s and sporadic cases, some patients display these changes only on a limited scale. For example, splicing and insolubility changes may be confined to only the most vulnerable cell types in patients (sporadic and C9) that were modestly different from control. As a result, changes in splicing or solubility that occur in a minority subpopulation of cells could be diluted in bulk studies by more numerous transcripts derived from unaffected cell types. A future goal will be to try to investigate whether such specific splicing events indeed exist that are unique or disproportionately relevant to affected neuronal populations.”

If the disease targets motor neurons, shouldn't there be an assessment of the splicing changes in the tissue containing these cells?

We agree that such an analysis would be worthwhile. However, technical difficulties, such as lower yield of RNA and spatial heterogeneity in the distribution of cell types over large volumes of tissue, make this challenging. In any case, the strong concordance between the extent of RBP aggregation in motor cortex and the magnitude of missplicing in cerebellum make a very strong case that the splicing defects we observed occur throughout the brain. This is now stressed in the text. An interesting question though is whether there may be a subset of transcripts that are misspliced in specific cell types such as motor neurons. However, an analysis of the depth required to detect this would be well beyond the scope of this study, technical difficulties aside.

2) The authors should also expand on the relationship of their new findings to the original splicing signature reported in 2016. Are the hnRNP H dependent splicing changes and the hnRNP H insolubility in C9 due to the expanded repeat RNAs sequestering hnRNP H? Or is it possible that the C9 aggregation is also caused other alterations in other RBPs that lead to the hnRNP H pathologies? A discussion of this will help readers assess the 2016 C9 data in light of their new findings.

It is our view that there are multiple ‘seeds’ that can ultimately lead to similar aggregation, and that C9 RNA is probably a particularly strong ‘seed’. Examples of other potential ‘seeds’ are given in Figure 6—figure supplement 5. These include TARDBP mutation, hnRNPA1 mutation, FUS mutation, stress or injury. We mention in the Discussion section that “many factors, including mutations known to cause disease […] are capable of influencing the balance between protein concentrations in each phase over time.” Ultimately, we do not know what initiates the aggregation described in sporadic patients in this study, or whether there is one common ‘seed’ amongst these patients. All we can say is that these changes are readily detectable in a large fraction of patients. Furthermore, we have discussed how aberrant splicing could itself be a ‘seed’ through the altered expression of RBP isoforms with differential tendencies to make protein-protein interactions that may be prone to aggregation (Discussion section).

Along these lines, we have also provided new experimental evidence (Figure 4l) that supports this ‘seed’ hypothesis. The high degree of correspondence between insoluble TDP-43 and insoluble hnRNP H can be explained by the fact that the two proteins co-aggregate in brain, as supported by co-immunoprecipitation from the sarkosyl insoluble pellet (Figure 4l). We have added the following to the text in subsection “Reciprocal insolubilities of hnRNP H and TDP-43 reveal TDP-43 LOF is exclusive to like-C9s”:

“One explanation for the similar degrees of hnRNP H and TDP-43 insolubility in the sporadic and C9 patient brains is that they coexist in the same physical aggregates. To test this hypothesis, we performed co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) of hnRNP H from eluates of the sarkosyl insoluble pellets of two like-C9 brains using a TDP-43 antibody for IP (see Methods). Indeed, TDP-43 antibody successfully co-IPed hnRNP H, while a negative control antibody (FLAG-M2) or beads alone did not (Figure 4l). These results support a reciprocal relationship between insolubility of hnRNP H and TDP-43, whereby aggregates initially seeded by one protein can recruit the other, and vice versa.”

In the case of C9s, we previously provided evidence that the aggregates contain G-Q forming RNA, suggesting the expansion in C9ORF72 can seed aggregates of hnRNP H via direct protein-RNA interactions (Conlon et al., 2016). Our new results now suggest this can further seed aggregation of additional RBPs such as TDP-43. Thus, if the two proteins are capable of co-aggregating, we envision that insolubility of a factor such as TDP-43 could be ‘upstream’ of hnRNP H insolubility. However, this begs the question, what makes TDP-43 insoluble? We found no experimental evidence for direct sequestration of TDP-43 by the expanded RNA. Furthermore, we have shown in this study that existence of TDP-43 pathology in degenerating regions such as the motor cortex does not necessarily translate into biochemically insoluble TDP-43, thus refuting the potential argument that TDP-43 pathology could be the cause of the hnRNP H insolubility and splicing changes.

3) Immunoblots for particular RNA binding proteins and other factors indicate that the formation of the aggregates is selective, but it is not clear how selective. Have the authors done shotgun mass spec identification of the proteins in the sarkosyl pellets? How many different proteins are aggregating? Are there other types of proteins in the aggregates besides RNA binders? If the MS data are available, it would potentially clarify several important questions regarding the aggregates and should be presented and discussed.

We agree that such an analysis would be informative; however, we did not generate any mass spec data. Such an analysis would likely not be straightforward and quantitatively accurate, as eluting insoluble proteins from the sarkosyl-insoluble pellet would likely lead to biases towards detecting proteins that re-solubilized more readily. Nonetheless, the method of eluting the pellet in a Tris solution that we used to perform co-IP could perhaps be optimized to perform mass spec, and we believe this represents an interesting future direction.
==== Refs
References
Alberti S  Hyman AA   2016 Are aberrant phase transitions a driver of cellular aging? BioEssays 38 959 968 10.1002/bies.201600042 27554449 
Alonso A  Logroscino G  Jick SS  Hernán MA   2009 Incidence and lifetime risk of motor neuron disease in the United Kingdom: a population-based study European Journal of Neurology 16 745 751 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02586.x 19475756 
Appocher C  Mohagheghi F  Cappelli S  Stuani C  Romano M  Feiguin F  Buratti E   2017 Major hnRNP proteins act as general TDP-43 functional modifiers both in Drosophila  and human neuronal cells Nucleic Acids Research 45 8026 8045 10.1093/nar/gkx477 28575377 
Baloh RH   2011 TDP-43: the relationship between protein aggregation and neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration FEBS Journal 278 3539 3549 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08256.x 21777387 
Buratti E  Brindisi A  Giombi M  Tisminetzky S  Ayala YM  Baralle FE   2005 TDP-43 binds heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A/B through its C-terminal tail: an important region for the inhibition of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator exon 9 splicing The Journal of Biological Chemistry 280 37572 37584 10.1074/jbc.M505557200 16157593 
Byrne S  Elamin M  Bede P  Shatunov A  Walsh C  Corr B  Heverin M  Jordan N  Kenna K  Lynch C  McLaughlin RL  Iyer PM  O'Brien C  Phukan J  Wynne B  Bokde AL  Bradley DG  Pender N  Al-Chalabi A  Hardiman O   2012 Cognitive and clinical characteristics of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis carrying a C9orf72 repeat expansion: a population-based cohort study The Lancet Neurology 11 232 240 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70014-5 22305801 
Conlon EG  Lu L  Sharma A  Yamazaki T  Tang T  Shneider NA  Manley JL   2016 The C9ORF72 GGGGCC expansion forms RNA G-quadruplex inclusions and sequesters hnRNP H to disrupt splicing in ALS brains eLife 5 e17820 10.7554/eLife.17820 27623008 
Conlon EG  Manley JL   2017 RNA-binding proteins in neurodegeneration: mechanisms in aggregate Genes & Development 31 1509 1528 10.1101/gad.304055.117 28912172 
DeJesus-Hernandez M  Mackenzie IR  Boeve BF  Boxer AL  Baker M  Rutherford NJ  Nicholson AM  Finch NA  Flynn H  Adamson J  Kouri N  Wojtas A  Sengdy P  Hsiung GY  Karydas A  Seeley WW  Josephs KA  Coppola G  Geschwind DH  Wszolek ZK  Feldman H  Knopman DS  Petersen RC  Miller BL  Dickson DW  Boylan KB  Graff-Radford NR  Rademakers R   2011 Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS Neuron 72 245 256 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.011 21944778 
Deshaies JE  Shkreta L  Moszczynski AJ  Sidibé H  Semmler S  Fouillen A  Bennett ER  Bekenstein U  Destroismaisons L  Toutant J  Delmotte Q  Volkening K  Stabile S  Aulas A  Khalfallah Y  Soreq H  Nanci A  Strong MJ  Chabot B  Vande Velde C   2018 TDP-43 regulates the alternative splicing of hnRNP A1 to yield an aggregation-prone variant in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Brain 141 1320 1333 10.1093/brain/awy062 29562314 
Dobin A  Gingeras TR   2015 Mapping RNA-seq reads with STAR Current Protocols in Bioinformatics 51 11 19 10.1002/0471250953.bi1114s51 26334920 
Elbaum-Garfinkle S  Kim Y  Szczepaniak K  Chen CC  Eckmann CR  Myong S  Brangwynne CP   2015 The disordered P granule protein LAF-1 drives phase separation into droplets with tunable viscosity and dynamics PNAS 112 7189 7194 10.1073/pnas.1504822112 26015579 
Fay MM  Anderson PJ  Ivanov P   2017 ALS/FTD-Associated C9ORF72 repeat RNA promotes phase transitions in vitro and in cells Cell Reports 21 3573 3584 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.11.093 29262335 
Fisette JF  Toutant J  Dugré-Brisson S  Desgroseillers L  Chabot B   2010 hnRNP A1 and hnRNP H can collaborate to modulate 5' splice site selection Rna 16 228 238 10.1261/rna.1890310 19926721 
Freibaum BD  Chitta RK  High AA  Taylor JP   2010 Global analysis of TDP-43 interacting proteins reveals strong association with RNA splicing and translation machinery Journal of Proteome Research 9 1104 1120 10.1021/pr901076y 20020773 
Ghetti B  Oblak AL  Boeve BF  Johnson KA  Dickerson BC  Goedert M   2015 Invited review: Frontotemporal dementia caused by microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT) mutations: a chameleon for neuropathology and neuroimaging Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology 41 24 46 10.1111/nan.12213 25556536 
Ginsberg SD  Galvin JE  Chiu TS  Lee VM  Masliah E  Trojanowski JQ   1998 RNA sequestration to pathological lesions of neurodegenerative diseases Acta Neuropathologica 96 487 494 10.1007/s004010050923 9829812 
Gueroussov S  Weatheritt RJ  O'Hanlon D  Lin ZY  Narula A  Gingras AC  Blencowe BJ   2017 Regulatory expansion in mammals of multivalent hnRNP assemblies that globally control alternative splicing Cell 170 324 339 10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.037 28709000 
Harrison AF  Shorter J   2017 RNA-binding proteins with prion-like domains in health and disease Biochemical Journal 474 1417 1438 10.1042/BCJ20160499 28389532 
Hensman Moss DJ  Poulter M  Beck J  Hehir J  Polke JM  Campbell T  Adamson G  Mudanohwo E  McColgan P  Haworth A  Wild EJ  Sweeney MG  Houlden H  Mead S  Tabrizi SJ   2014 C9orf72  expansions are the most common genetic cause of Huntington disease phenocopies Neurology 82 292 299 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000061 24363131 
Hua Y  Zhou J   2004 Survival motor neuron protein facilitates assembly of stress granules FEBS Letters 572 69 74 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.010 15304326 
Huelga SC  Vu AQ  Arnold JD  Liang TY  Liu PP  Yan BY  Donohue JP  Shiue L  Hoon S  Brenner S  Ares M  Yeo GW   2012 Integrative genome-wide analysis reveals cooperative regulation of alternative splicing by hnRNP proteins Cell Reports 1 167 178 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.02.001 22574288 
Humphrey J  Emmett W  Fratta P  Isaacs AM  Plagnol V   2017 Quantitative analysis of cryptic splicing associated with TDP-43 depletion BMC Medical Genomics 10 38 10.1186/s12920-017-0274-1 28549443 
Ishihara T  Ariizumi Y  Shiga A  Kato T  Tan CF  Sato T  Miki Y  Yokoo M  Fujino T  Koyama A  Yokoseki A  Nishizawa M  Kakita A  Takahashi H  Onodera O   2013 Decreased number of gemini of coiled bodies and U12 snRNA level in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Human Molecular Genetics 22 4136 4147 10.1093/hmg/ddt262 23740936 
Izquierdo JM  Valcárcel J   2007 Two isoforms of the T-cell intracellular antigen 1 (TIA-1) splicing factor display distinct splicing regulation activities. Control of TIA-1 isoform ratio by TIA-1-related protein The Journal of Biological Chemistry 282 19410 19417 10.1074/jbc.M700688200 17488725 
Jain A  Vale RD   2017 RNA phase transitions in repeat expansion disorders Nature 546 243 247 10.1038/nature22386 28562589 
Kim HJ  Kim NC  Wang YD  Scarborough EA  Moore J  Diaz Z  MacLea KS  Freibaum B  Li S  Molliex A  Kanagaraj AP  Carter R  Boylan KB  Wojtas AM  Rademakers R  Pinkus JL  Greenberg SA  Trojanowski JQ  Traynor BJ  Smith BN  Topp S  Gkazi AS  Miller J  Shaw CE  Kottlors M  Kirschner J  Pestronk A  Li YR  Ford AF  Gitler AD  Benatar M  King OD  Kimonis VE  Ross ED  Weihl CC  Shorter J  Taylor JP   2013 Mutations in prion-like domains in hnRNPA2B1 and hnRNPA1 cause multisystem proteinopathy and ALS Nature 495 467 473 10.1038/nature11922 23455423 
Lagier-Tourenne C  Cleveland DW   2009 Rethinking ALS: the FUS about TDP-43 Cell 136 1001 1004 10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.006 19303844 
Lagier-Tourenne C  Polymenidou M  Hutt KR  Vu AQ  Baughn M  Huelga SC  Clutario KM  Ling SC  Liang TY  Mazur C  Wancewicz E  Kim AS  Watt A  Freier S  Hicks GG  Donohue JP  Shiue L  Bennett CF  Ravits J  Cleveland DW  Yeo GW   2012 Divergent roles of ALS-linked proteins FUS/TLS and TDP-43 intersect in processing long pre-mRNAs Nature Neuroscience 15 1488 1497 10.1038/nn.3230 23023293 
Lattante S  Ciura S  Rouleau GA  Kabashi E   2015 Defining the genetic connection linking amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) Trends in Genetics 31 263 273 10.1016/j.tig.2015.03.005 25869998 
Lefebvre S  Burlet P  Liu Q  Bertrandy S  Clermont O  Munnich A  Dreyfuss G  Melki J   1997 Correlation between severity and SMN protein level in spinal muscular atrophy Nature Genetics 16 265 269 10.1038/ng0797-265 9207792 
Lesage S  Le Ber I  Condroyer C  Broussolle E  Gabelle A  Thobois S  Pasquier F  Mondon K  Dion PA  Rochefort D  Rouleau GA  Dürr A  Brice A  French Parkinson’s Disease Genetics Study Group  2013 C9orf72  repeat expansions are a rare genetic cause of parkinsonism Brain 136 385 391 10.1093/brain/aws357 23413259 
Li YI  Knowles DA  Humphrey J  Barbeira AN  Dickinson SP  Im HK  Pritchard JK   2018 Annotation-free quantification of RNA splicing using LeafCutter Nature Genetics 50 151 158 10.1038/s41588-017-0004-9 29229983 
Lin CL  Bristol LA  Jin L  Dykes-Hoberg M  Crawford T  Clawson L  Rothstein JD   1998 Aberrant RNA processing in a neurodegenerative disease: the cause for absent EAAT2, a glutamate transporter, in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neuron 20 589 602 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80997-6 9539131 
Lin Y  Protter DS  Rosen MK  Parker R   2015 Formation and maturation of Phase-Separated liquid droplets by RNA-Binding proteins Molecular Cell 60 208 219 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.08.018 26412307 
Ling JP  Pletnikova O  Troncoso JC  Wong PC   2015 TDP-43 repression of nonconserved cryptic exons is compromised in ALS-FTD Science 349 650 655 10.1126/science.aab0983 26250685 
Ling SC  Albuquerque CP  Han JS  Lagier-Tourenne C  Tokunaga S  Zhou H  Cleveland DW   2010 ALS-associated mutations in TDP-43 increase its stability and promote TDP-43 complexes with FUS/TLS PNAS 107 13318 13323 10.1073/pnas.1008227107 20624952 
Ling SC  Polymenidou M  Cleveland DW   2013 Converging mechanisms in ALS and FTD: disrupted RNA and protein homeostasis Neuron 79 416 438 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.07.033 23931993 
Liu EY  Russ J  Wu K  Neal D  Suh E  McNally AG  Irwin DJ  Van Deerlin VM  Lee EB   2014 C9orf72 hypermethylation protects against repeat expansion-associated pathology in ALS/FTD Acta Neuropathologica 128 525 541 10.1007/s00401-014-1286-y 24806409 
Mackenzie IR  Bigio EH  Ince PG  Geser F  Neumann M  Cairns NJ  Kwong LK  Forman MS  Ravits J  Stewart H  Eisen A  McClusky L  Kretzschmar HA  Monoranu CM  Highley JR  Kirby J  Siddique T  Shaw PJ  Lee VM  Trojanowski JQ   2007 Pathological TDP-43 distinguishes sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with SOD1 mutations Annals of Neurology 61 427 434 10.1002/ana.21147 17469116 
Mackenzie IR  Frick P  Neumann M   2014 The neuropathology associated with repeat expansions in the C9ORF72  gene Acta Neuropathologica 127 347 357 10.1007/s00401-013-1232-4 24356984 
Mackenzie IR  Nicholson AM  Sarkar M  Messing J  Purice MD  Pottier C  Annu K  Baker M  Perkerson RB  Kurti A  Matchett BJ  Mittag T  Temirov J  Hsiung GR  Krieger C  Murray ME  Kato M  Fryer JD  Petrucelli L  Zinman L  Weintraub S  Mesulam M  Keith J  Zivkovic SA  Hirsch-Reinshagen V  Roos RP  Züchner S  Graff-Radford NR  Petersen RC  Caselli RJ  Wszolek ZK  Finger E  Lippa C  Lacomis D  Stewart H  Dickson DW  Kim HJ  Rogaeva E  Bigio E  Boylan KB  Taylor JP  Rademakers R   2017 TIA1 mutations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia promote phase separation and alter stress granule dynamics Neuron 95 808 816 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.07.025 28817800 
Markmiller S  Soltanieh S  Server KL  Mak R  Jin W  Fang MY  Luo EC  Krach F  Yang D  Sen A  Fulzele A  Wozniak JM  Gonzalez DJ  Kankel MW  Gao FB  Bennett EJ  Lécuyer E  Yeo GW   2018 Context-Dependent and Disease-Specific diversity in protein interactions within stress granules Cell 172 590 604 10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.032 29373831 
Martinez FJ  Pratt GA  Van Nostrand EL  Batra R  Huelga SC  Kapeli K  Freese P  Chun SJ  Ling K  Gelboin-Burkhart C  Fijany L  Wang HC  Nussbacher JK  Broski SM  Kim HJ  Lardelli R  Sundararaman B  Donohue JP  Javaherian A  Lykke-Andersen J  Finkbeiner S  Bennett CF  Ares M  Burge CB  Taylor JP  Rigo F  Yeo GW   2016 Protein-RNA networks regulated by normal and ALS-Associated mutant HNRNPA2B1 in the nervous system Neuron 92 780 795 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.09.050 27773581 
McLaughlin RL  Schijven D  van Rheenen W  van Eijk KR  O'Brien M  Kahn RS  Ophoff RA  Goris A  Bradley DG  Al-Chalabi A  van den Berg LH  Luykx JJ  Hardiman O  Veldink JH  Project MinE GWAS Consortium Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium  2017 Genetic correlation between amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and schizophrenia Nature Communications 8 14774 10.1038/ncomms14774 28322246 
Mohagheghi F  Prudencio M  Stuani C  Cook C  Jansen-West K  Dickson DW  Petrucelli L  Buratti E   2016 TDP-43 functions within a network of hnRNP proteins to inhibit the production of a truncated human SORT1 receptor Human Molecular Genetics 25 534 545 10.1093/hmg/ddv491 26614389 
Murakami T  Qamar S  Lin JQ  Schierle GS  Rees E  Miyashita A  Costa AR  Dodd RB  Chan FT  Michel CH  Kronenberg-Versteeg D  Li Y  Yang SP  Wakutani Y  Meadows W  Ferry RR  Dong L  Tartaglia GG  Favrin G  Lin WL  Dickson DW  Zhen M  Ron D  Schmitt-Ulms G  Fraser PE  Shneider NA  Holt C  Vendruscolo M  Kaminski CF  St George-Hyslop P   2015 ALS/FTD Mutation-Induced phase transition of FUS liquid droplets and reversible hydrogels into irreversible hydrogels impairs RNP granule function Neuron 88 678 690 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.10.030 26526393 
Nazim M  Masuda A  Rahman MA  Nasrin F  Takeda JI  Ohe K  Ohkawara B  Ito M  Ohno K   2017 Competitive regulation of alternative splicing and alternative polyadenylation by hnRNP H and CstF64 determines acetylcholinesterase isoforms Nucleic Acids Research 45 1455 1468 10.1093/nar/gkw823 28180311 
Nijssen J  Comley LH  Hedlund E   2017 Motor neuron vulnerability and resistance in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Acta Neuropathologica 133 863 885 10.1007/s00401-017-1708-8 28409282 
Patel A  Lee HO  Jawerth L  Maharana S  Jahnel M  Hein MY  Stoynov S  Mahamid J  Saha S  Franzmann TM  Pozniakovski A  Poser I  Maghelli N  Royer LA  Weigert M  Myers EW  Grill S  Drechsel D  Hyman AA  Alberti S   2015 A Liquid-to-Solid phase transition of the ALS protein FUS accelerated by disease mutation Cell 162 1066 1077 10.1016/j.cell.2015.07.047 26317470 
Polymenidou M  Lagier-Tourenne C  Hutt KR  Huelga SC  Moran J  Liang TY  Ling SC  Sun E  Wancewicz E  Mazur C  Kordasiewicz H  Sedaghat Y  Donohue JP  Shiue L  Bennett CF  Yeo GW  Cleveland DW   2011 Long pre-mRNA depletion and RNA missplicing contribute to neuronal vulnerability from loss of TDP-43 Nature Neuroscience 14 459 468 10.1038/nn.2779 21358643 
Prudencio M  Belzil VV  Batra R  Ross CA  Gendron TF  Pregent LJ  Murray ME  Overstreet KK  Piazza-Johnston AE  Desaro P  Bieniek KF  DeTure M  Lee WC  Biendarra SM  Davis MD  Baker MC  Perkerson RB  van Blitterswijk M  Stetler CT  Rademakers R  Link CD  Dickson DW  Boylan KB  Li H  Petrucelli L   2015 Distinct brain transcriptome profiles in C9orf72-associated and sporadic ALS Nature Neuroscience 18 1175 1182 10.1038/nn.4065 26192745 
Ramaswami M  Taylor JP  Parker R   2013 Altered ribostasis: RNA-protein granules in degenerative disorders Cell 154 727 736 10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.038 23953108 
Reber S  Stettler J  Filosa G  Colombo M  Jutzi D  Lenzken SC  Schweingruber C  Bruggmann R  Bachi A  Barabino SM  Mühlemann O  Ruepp MD   2016 Minor intron splicing is regulated by FUS and affected by ALS-associated FUS mutants The EMBO Journal 35 1504 1521 10.15252/embj.201593791 27252488 
Renton AE  Majounie E  Waite A  Simón-Sánchez J  Rollinson S  Gibbs JR  Schymick JC  Laaksovirta H  van Swieten JC  Myllykangas L  Kalimo H  Paetau A  Abramzon Y  Remes AM  Kaganovich A  Scholz SW  Duckworth J  Ding J  Harmer DW  Hernandez DG  Johnson JO  Mok K  Ryten M  Trabzuni D  Guerreiro RJ  Orrell RW  Neal J  Murray A  Pearson J  Jansen IE  Sondervan D  Seelaar H  Blake D  Young K  Halliwell N  Callister JB  Toulson G  Richardson A  Gerhard A  Snowden J  Mann D  Neary D  Nalls MA  Peuralinna T  Jansson L  Isoviita VM  Kaivorinne AL  Hölttä-Vuori M  Ikonen E  Sulkava R  Benatar M  Wuu J  Chiò A  Restagno G  Borghero G  Sabatelli M  Heckerman D  Rogaeva E  Zinman L  Rothstein JD  Sendtner M  Drepper C  Eichler EE  Alkan C  Abdullaev Z  Pack SD  Dutra A  Pak E  Hardy J  Singleton A  Williams NM  Heutink P  Pickering-Brown S  Morris HR  Tienari PJ  Traynor BJ  ITALSGEN Consortium  2011 A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD Neuron 72 257 268 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.010 21944779 
Ross CA  Poirier MA   2004 Protein aggregation and neurodegenerative disease Nature Medicine 10 S10 S17 10.1038/nm1066 15272267 
Rowland LP  Shneider NA   2001 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis New England Journal of Medicine 344 1688 1700 10.1056/NEJM200105313442207 11386269 
Schwartz JC  Wang X  Podell ER  Cech TR   2013 RNA seeds higher-order assembly of FUS protein Cell Reports 5 918 925 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.11.017 24268778 
Scotter EL  Chen HJ  Shaw CE   2015 TDP-43 proteinopathy and ALS: insights into disease mechanisms and therapeutic targets Neurotherapeutics 12 352 363 10.1007/s13311-015-0338-x 25652699 
Seelaar H  Rohrer JD  Pijnenburg YA  Fox NC  van Swieten JC   2011 Clinical, genetic and pathological heterogeneity of frontotemporal dementia: a review Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry 82 476 486 10.1136/jnnp.2010.212225 20971753 
Sephton CF  Cenik C  Kucukural A  Dammer EB  Cenik B  Han Y  Dewey CM  Roth FP  Herz J  Peng J  Moore MJ  Yu G   2011 Identification of neuronal RNA targets of TDP-43-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes Journal of Biological Chemistry 286 1204 1215 10.1074/jbc.M110.190884 21051541 
Shan X  Chiang PM  Price DL  Wong PC   2010 Altered distributions of Gemini of coiled bodies and mitochondria in motor neurons of TDP-43 transgenic mice PNAS 107 16325 16330 10.1073/pnas.1003459107 20736350 
Taylor JP  Brown RH  Cleveland DW   2016 Decoding ALS: from genes to mechanism Nature 539 197 206 10.1038/nature20413 27830784 
Thomas MG  Loschi M  Desbats MA  Boccaccio GL   2011 RNA granules: the good, the bad and the ugly Cellular Signalling 23 324 334 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.08.011 20813183 
Tollervey JR  Curk T  Rogelj B  Briese M  Cereda M  Kayikci M  König J  Hortobágyi T  Nishimura AL  Zupunski V  Patani R  Chandran S  Rot G  Zupan B  Shaw CE  Ule J   2011 Characterizing the RNA targets and position-dependent splicing regulation by TDP-43 Nature Neuroscience 14 452 458 10.1038/nn.2778 21358640 
Tsuiji H  Iguchi Y  Furuya A  Kataoka A  Hatsuta H  Atsuta N  Tanaka F  Hashizume Y  Akatsu H  Murayama S  Sobue G  Yamanaka K   2013 Spliceosome integrity is defective in the motor neuron diseases ALS and SMA EMBO Molecular Medicine 5 221 234 10.1002/emmm.201202303 23255347 
Tu WY  Simpson JE  Highley JR  Heath PR   2017 Spinal muscular atrophy: factors that modulate motor neurone vulnerability Neurobiology of Disease 102 11 20 10.1016/j.nbd.2017.01.011 28161391 
Van Mossevelde S  van der Zee J  Cruts M  Van Broeckhoven C   2017 Relationship between C9orf72 repeat size and clinical phenotype Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 44 117 124 10.1016/j.gde.2017.02.008 28319737 
Vanden Broeck L  Callaerts P  Dermaut B   2014 TDP-43-mediated neurodegeneration: towards a loss-of-function hypothesis? Trends in Molecular Medicine 20 66 71 10.1016/j.molmed.2013.11.003 24355761 
Weber SC  Brangwynne CP   2012 Getting RNA and protein in phase Cell 149 1188 1191 10.1016/j.cell.2012.05.022 22682242 
Zhang H  Xing L  Rossoll W  Wichterle H  Singer RH  Bassell GJ   2006 Multiprotein complexes of the survival of motor neuron protein SMN with Gemins traffic to neuronal processes and growth cones of motor neurons Journal of Neuroscience 26 8622 8632 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3967-05.2006 16914688 
Zhang Z  Lotti F  Dittmar K  Younis I  Wan L  Kasim M  Dreyfuss G   2008 SMN deficiency causes tissue-specific perturbations in the repertoire of snRNAs and widespread defects in splicing Cell 133 585 600 10.1016/j.cell.2008.03.031 18485868 
Zhou Y  Liu S  Liu G  Oztürk A  Hicks GG   2013 ALS-associated FUS mutations result in compromised FUS alternative splicing and autoregulation PLoS Genetics 9 e1003895 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003895 24204307

