
==== Front
Psychiatry ResPsychiatry ResPsychiatry Research0165-17811872-7123Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical Press S0925-4927(17)30186-510.1016/j.pscychresns.2017.11.017ArticleThe effect of intranasal oxytocin on neural response to facial emotions in healthy adults as measured by functional MRI: A systematic review Tully John john.tully@kcl.ac.uka⁎Gabay Anthony S. bBrown Danielle cMurphy Declan G.M. aBlackwood Nigel aa Department of Forensic and Neurodevelopmental Sciences, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Kings College London, London, United Kingdomb Department of Neuroimaging, Kings College London, London, United Kingdomc Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Kings College London, London, United Kingdom⁎ Corresponding author. john.tully@kcl.ac.uk28 2 2018 28 2 2018 272 17 29 16 6 2017 24 11 2017 25 11 2017 © 2018 The Authors2018This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Abnormalities in responses to human facial emotions are associated with a range of psychiatric disorders. Addressing these abnormalities may therefore have significant clinical applications. Previous meta-analyses have demonstrated effects of the neuropeptide oxytocin on behavioural response to facial emotions, and effects on brain, as measured by functional MRI. Evidence suggests that these effects may be mediated by sex and the role of eye gaze. However, the specific effect of oxytocin on brain response to facial emotions in healthy adults has not been systematically analysed. To address this question, this further systematic review was conducted. Twenty-two studies met our inclusion criteria. In men, oxytocin consistently attenuated brain activity in response to negative emotional faces, particularly fear, compared with placebo, while in women, oxytocin enhanced activity. Brain regions consistently involved included the amygdala, fusiform gyrus and anterior cingulate cortex. In some studies, oxytocin increased fixation changes towards the eyes with enhanced amygdala and/or fusiform gyrus activation. By enhancing understanding of emotion processing in healthy subjects, these pharmacoimaging studies provide a theoretical basis for studying deficits in clinical populations. However, progress to date has been limited by low statistical power, methodological heterogeneity, and a lack of multimodal studies.

Highlights
• This review examines the effect of oxytocin on brain response to facial emotions in healthy adults.

• In men, oxytocin consistently attenuates brain activity in response to negative emotional faces, particularly fear.

• In women, oxytocin appears to enhance brain activity.

• Brain regions involved include the amygdala, fusiform gyrus and anterior cingulate cortex.

• In some studies, oxytocin increases eye gaze with enhanced amygdala +/- fusiform gyrus activation.



Keywords
EmpathyNeuropeptidesNeurochemistryAmygdalaAnterior cingulate cortexFusiform cortexBiomarkers
==== Body
1 Introduction
Emotion recognition is a central component of social cognition. It provides the capacity to understand the intentions, feelings, and reactions of others (Shahrestani et al., 2013). Emotion recognition has been linked to altruistic helping behaviour (Marsh et al., 2007) and higher relationship quality with a lower rate of depression (Carton et al., 1999). In contrast, deficits in emotion recognition are associated with increased social anxiety and avoidance and antisocial behaviour as well as psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, depression, autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and psychopathy (Chung et al., 2013; McClure and Nowicki Jr, 2001; McClure et al., 2014; Uljarevic and Hamilton, 2013). Furthermore, social cognitive deficits, including emotion recognition, predict social function in both early psychosis (Bertrand et al., 2007) and autism (Losh et al., 2009) above other tests of neurocognition. Emotion recognition has been investigated in functional neuroimaging studies by analysing neural response to facial emotions, alongside behavioural measures. Brain regions identified by meta-analyses of functional neuroimaging studies as having a role in response to facial emotions include globus pallidus, lateral orbitofrontal cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, subcallosal cingulate and most consistently, the amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the insula. (Murphy et al., 2003, Phan et al., 2002).

Oxytocin is a neuropeptide central to the regulation of complex social cognition and behaviours, such as attachment, social exploration, and recognition. For example, in prairie voles, oxytocin plays a key role in pair bond formation (Young and Wang, 2004) and reducing fear in social interactions (Carter et al., 2008). In healthy humans, oxytocin binds to receptors in social brain regions such as the amygdala and ACC (Boccia et al., 2013) and plays a key role in social brain functions such as modulation of social stress, emotion recognition and memory formation (Meyer-Lindenberg et al., 2011). Oxytocin has also been shown to exert modulatory effects on brain activity in people with mental disorders. For instance, in women with borderline personality disorder, oxytocin attenuates abnormal behavioural and amygdala processing of emotional stimuli (Bertsch et al., 2013). In autism, some (Anagnostou et al., 2012, Andari et al., 2010, Guastella et al., 2010, Hollander et al., 2007), albeit not all (Dadds et al., 2014), studies have reported that oxytocin improves emotion recognition, and modulates activity in the medial prefrontal cortex (Aoki et al., 2015, Watanabe et al., 2013).

The impact of oxytocin on behavioural and brain response to facial emotions has typically been evaluated experimentally using a single dose of intranasal oxytocin given 30–45 min before behavioural experiments (Guastella and MacLeod, 2012). Some studies have suggested that oxytocin specifically improves the perception of happy faces, (Marsh et al., 2007, Schulze et al., 2011), while others report that oxytocin improves the recognition of angry, sad, and fearful emotions in faces (Ellenbogen et al., 2012, Fischer-Shofty et al., 2010; Lischke et al., 2012a). Guastella and MacLeod (2012) have argued that differences in methodologies or samples between studies may contribute to such inconsistent findings. It should also be noted that recent reviews of the oxytocin literature (Quintana, 2018; Walum et al., 2016) have highlighted that many studies of behavioural effects are underpowered, and have made recommendations to improve the reliability of oxytocin research and identify more promising avenues for future work. These include employing equivalence tests in statistical analysis (Quintana, 2018), performing a priori power calculations, disclosing methods and findings transparently, and working collaboratively to increase power and replicate findings (Walum et al., 2016).

Notwithstanding these concerns, a meta-analysis of the effects of single dose oxytocin on recognition of facial emotions in healthy subjects showed that intranasal oxytocin administration enhances emotion recognition of faces overall (Hedges g effect size 0.29) (Shahrestani et al., 2013). When analysis was restricted to facial expression types, significant effects of oxytocin on recognition accuracy were specifically found for the recognition of happy and fearful faces. A further recent meta-analysis demonstrated that a single dose of intranasal oxytocin significantly improved the recognition of basic emotions, particularly fear, among healthy individuals (Leppanen et al., 2017).

While these are interesting findings, neurocognitive or behavioural studies do not demonstrate underlying activity in the brain, the substrate for any potential therapeutic modulation. In contrast, using functional imaging to elucidate which brain regions are affected by oxytocin can demonstrate a neural underpinning for its effects. Applied to mental disorders, this approach may be used to demonstrate differential modulation of brain compared to healthy controls and help identify treatment targets and pathways into and pathways out of these disorders. Further, many neuroimaging studies utilise paradigms which measure ‘implicit’ processing of facial emotions. Such tasks require participants simply to identify the sex of faces presented, or stay focused on the face, rather than explicity identifying the emotion. This may have the added benefit of removing variance caused by participant effort on behavioural tasks (Bethlehem et al., 2013).

Furthermore, several studies have called into question the supposed ‘prosocial’ effects of oxytocin (Bartz et al., 2011, De Dreu et al., 2011a, De Dreu et al., 2010, De Dreu et al., 2011b) and suggested likely mediation of its effects by social context (Bartz et al., 2011) and other social (Heinrichs et al., 2003, Meinlschmidt and Heim, 2007, Saphire-Bernstein et al., 2011, Strathearn et al., 2009) physiological (Cardoso et al., 2013, Ditzen et al., 2009, Norman et al., 2012), and genetic (Feldman et al., 2013, Kim et al., 2010, Marsh et al., 2012, Rodrigues et al., 2009, Saphire-Bernstein et al., 2011, Tost et al., 2010, Tost et al., 2011, Walum et al., 2012) factors. Functional imaging may therefore also have a role in elucidating differential neural mechanisms underlying these confounding variables. Particularly relevant to processing of facial emotion recognition may be eye-gaze, which is an important factor in classifying facial expressions (Haxby et al., 2002, Smith et al., 2005) and has been shown to be affected by oxytocin (Domes et al., 2013) and mediated by the amygdala (Gamer and Büchel, 2009).

Two recent meta-analyses of FMRI studies have demonstrated that, in healthy controls, intranasal administration of oxytocin resulted in consistent alterations in activation of brain regions, including the amygdala, temporal lobes, ACC and insula, during the processing of a range of social stimuli, not exclusive to facial emotions (Wang et al., 2017, Wigton et al., 2015). The aim of our review was to systematically analyse the evidence specifically for modulation of neural processing of facial emotions by oxytocin, as measured by fMRI, in healthy controls. We discuss the specific effects of oxytocin on processing of individual emotions, as examined by some of the studies. We discuss mediation of oxytocin's effects by sex and specific emotion. We consider the potential impact of use of implicit vs explicit paradigms. We also consider apparent discrepancies in hemispheric lateralisation and brain regions identified across studies. Finally, we discuss the effects of oxytocin on gaze processing and the role of genetic polymorphisms, as examined by some of these studies.

2 Methods
2.1 Search strategy
We used a systematic search strategy following the PRISMA guidelines for systematic reviews (Moher et al., 2009) to identify relevant studies for inclusion in our review. The databases used were MEDLINE (PubMed), Web of Science and The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) Embase, ClinicalTrials.gov, PsychInfo, BioMed Central, Google Scholar, and Scopus. Non-automated searching and cross referencing of relevant publications was also conducted. Search terms used were “Oxytocin” AND “fMRI OR functional magnetic resonance imaging” AND “facial emotion recognition OR empathy task OR emotion recognition OR facial expression OR valence task”. All studies identified as meeting the pre-specified eligibility criteria were exported to EndNote. Study abstracts were assessed for inclusion or exclusion by three authors (JT, AG, DB). Full papers were obtained for studies which met all inclusion criteria as outlined above. Papers published online up until September 2017 were included. Although no limits were placed on the language for an article, all articles found that fit our selection criteria were published in English.

2.2 Eligibility criteria
The primary outcome of interest for this review was the effect of oxytocin on response to facial emotions as measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in normal adult subjects. Studies were selected on the basis that (i) participants were administered a single dose of oxytocin intranasally, (ii) the effect of intranasally administered oxytocin on facial emotion processing was measured using fMRI, and (iii) a facial emotion processing paradigm (or paradigms) were used to measure the effects of oxytocin on response to facial emotions. We included studies using paradigms measuring both implicit and explicit responses to facial emotions. Studies considered for selection were randomised controlled trials (RCT), cross-over studies, between-subject design studies and within-subjects design studies. Only normal population adult subjects were included. Studies that used a patient population but also reported findings for healthy controls were included if they satisfied all other criteria. There were no restrictions on sex. Exclusion criteria were postmortem studies, structural imaging techniques, studies looking at only endogenous oxytocin or modes of delivery other than intranasal, and studies examining response to facial emotion tasks only (i.e. without fMRI).

2.3 GRADE scoring
To evaluate the quality of the evidence, GRADE scoring (Guyatt et al., 2008) was employed. The GRADE system evaluates quality across studies and specifically assesses methodological flaws within the component studies, consistency of results across different studies, generalisability of research results to the wider patient base and how effective the treatments have been shown to be.

3 Results
3.1 Samples, demographics, and study design
The results from the literature search are illustrated in the PRISMA diagram (Fig. 1). Healthy control samples were male (n = 16 studies), female (n = 4), or both male and female (n= 2) participants without histories or signs of neurological, endocrine, psychiatric or serious somatic illnesses and not taking psychotropic medications.Fig. 1 Study selection process (PRISMA).

Fig. 1

Samples, demographics and key findings are outlined in Table 1. Sample ages ranged on average from 19.66 years (± 1.45) to 39.3 years (± 6.2). Sample sizes ranged from 13 to 116 participants with a total of 772 subjects from the combined studies (178 females) and an average group size of 36.54 (note, two studies by Koch et al., 2016a, Koch et al., 2016b used the same sample, as did the studies by Sauer et al., 2012 and Montag et al., 2013). Sixteen studies examined healthy populations only, while seven studied clinical populations but included healthy controls. Of the twenty-two studies included, ten used a double-blind, placebo controlled within-subject design and eleven used a double-blind, placebo-controlled between-subject design. Spengler et al. (2017) used a between-subjects design to compare doses and a crossover design to compare times of dosing. Thirteen studies used a paradigm measuring explicit response to facial emotions, while eight used a paradigm measuring implicit response; Voorthuis et al. (2014) compared explicit to implicit responses. Only seven studies used neutral facial expressions as a specific contrast to emotional faces. The most frequently studied emotions were happiness (seventeen studies), fear (fourteen) and anger (eleven). Sadness, surprise, and disgust were each studied in two studies only.Table 1 Details of included studies.

Table 1Study	Subjects (mean age and s.d.)	Study design	Intranasal Oxytocin application	Facial emotion response paradigm and design	Facial Emotions presented in task	Summary of FMRI facial emotion paradigm andfunctional connectivity findings	
Bertsch et al. (2013)	41 females (24.4/24.6 +/- 3.9/4/4 years (oxytocin/placebo))	Double-blind, placebo controlled between- subject design	26 IU; 45 mins before fMRI	Explicit classification of 72 briefly presented faces, unambiguously depicting expressions	Happiness, fear, anger	OT enhanced right, centrally located amygdala activation in response to fearful faces	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Domes et al. (2007)	13 Males (25.7 ± 2.9 years)	Double-blind, placebo controlled within-subject design	24 IU; 45 mins before task	Implicit Facial Affect Recognition Paradigm	Happiness, fear, anger	ROI: OT reduced activity of the right amygdala in response to happy, fearful and angry faces	
WBA: modulatory effects of OT in prefrontal and temporal areas as well as in the brainstem	
Block design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Domes et al. (2010)~	16 Females (24.2 ± 2.5 years)	Double-blind, placebo controlled within-subject design	24 IU; 45-60 mins before task	Explicit rating of labelled emotions	Happiness, fear, anger (and neutral)	OT enhanced activity in the left amygdala, FG and STG in response to fearful faces and in inferior frontal gyrus in response to angry and happy faces	
Block design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Domes et al. (2014)	14 Males (23.6 ± 5.4 years)	Randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled, within-subject, cross-over design	24 IU; 45 mins before start of fMRI experiment	Explicit rating of facial emotion based on eyes or mouth	Happiness, fear, anger, disgust, sadness, surprise	No observed effects in amygdala ROI analysis; OT administration Increased activation in inferior frontal gyrus (for eye stimuli) and fusiform gyrus (for mouth stimuli) on WBA	
Event-related design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Gamer et al. (2010)~	46 Males (25.0 ± 3.7 years)	Double-blind, placebo controlled between-subject design	24 IU; 45 mins before task	Explicit classification of emotions	Happiness, fear (and neutral)	OT attenuated activation in lateral and dorsal regions of the anterior amygdala for fearful faces but enhanced activity for happy expressions	
Event-related design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Gorka et al. (2015)	17 Males (29.9 years)	Randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled, within-subject design	24 IU; 45 mins before start of fMRI experiment	EFMT: explicit matching of emotion shown with one of two others shown	Happiness, fear, anger	OT reduced amygdala connectivity to insula and mid/dACC (in healthy controls)	
Block design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Groppe et al. (2013)	28 females (26.64 ± 5.55 years)	Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled between subject (parallel group) design	26 IU; 30 min before task	Social incentive delay task- uses happy or angry faces as social cues for reward; recognition of emotions implicit	Happiness, anger	OT led to significantly stronger activation in VTA to cues of high social reward (happy faces) but not low social reward (angry faces) compared with control cues	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Kanat et al. (2015a)	50 males (placebo 23.9 ± 2.74, OT 24.32 ± 3.43)	Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, between-subjects design	24 IU; 55 min before task	Implicit response to fearful or happy faces, and fearful or happy masked eyes	Happiness, fear	ROI: no effect during the processing of fearful as compared with happy control stimuli; oxytocin significantly reduced right amygdala responses to fearful as compared with happy stimuli in the eye condition	
Block design	
WBA: oxytocin reduced brain responses to fearful as compared with happy stimuli in face and eye stimuli within the left ACC and left MTG	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Kanat et al. (2015b)	49 males (23.64 years ± 2.81)	Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, between-subjects design	24 IU; 45 mins before task	Explicit identification of emotion	Happiness, fear	ROI: OT potently reduced left and right amygdala responses to eye region of masked angry faces & dampened amygdala reactivity to mouth as compared to the eye region of masked happy faces.	
Block design	
WBA: OT specifically reduced the response of the fusiform gyrus to anger cues from the eye region; OT attenuated reactivity to masked threat from the eyes as compared to the mouth within brain stem regions and the striate cortex	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Kirsch et al. (2005)	15 Males (26.7 ± 3.0 years)	Double-blind, placebo controlled within-subject design	27 IU; 50 mins before task	Facial emotion recognition task (Hariri)- explicit matching of emotions	Fear, anger	OT decreased amygdala connectivity to the brain stem, & decreased left amygdala activation in response to angry & afraid faces.	
Block design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Koch et al., 2016a, Koch et al., 2016b* a= Task b= Functional Connectivity	20 Males (41.35 ± 10.62years); 20 Females (38.65 ± 9.48 years)	Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study (within-subject design)	40 IU; 45 mins before task	Facial emotion recognition task (Hariri)- explicit matching of emotions	Happiness, fear, anger	No significant main effect of OT on left and right amygdala reactivity towards emotional faces	
Decreased right BLA to left dACC connectivity in males	
Block design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Labuschagne et al. (2012)	18 Males (29.9 ± 10.2 years)	Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled within-subjects design	24IU; 50 mins before FMRI	Explicit rating of positive, negative or neutral	Happiness, sadness (and neutral)	Sad vs. neutral faces: OT decreased activity in the right ACC, right MFG, right premotor and left SPC, and enhanced activity in the thalamus.	
Block design	
Happy vs neutral: OT suppressed activity in right mPFC, right ACC, left MFG, left precuneus, left FG, left CF and cerebellum; enhanced right STG	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Luo et al. (2017)	43 males, 43 females (22.41 ± 2.1 years)	Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled between-subject design	24IU; 45 mins before task	Implicit- rapid response gender-discrimination task	Happiness, fear, anger, sadness, disgust	OT suppressed IFG, dorsal ACC and anterior insula responses to threatening face stimuli in men, but increased them in women.	
Event-related design	
Sex-dependent effects on amygdala, ACC and IFG functional connectivity that were mainly driven by reduced coupling in women following OXT	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
+Montag et al. (2013)~	M = 24.9 ± 2.6 years	Double-blind, placebo controlled between-subjects design	25 IU; 45 mins before task	Implicit- gaze direction identification	Neutral (direct vs indirect gaze)	Genetic variation of the OXTR gene (rs401015) modulated right amygdala activity for direct > averted gaze under influence of OT	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Petrovic et al. (2008)~	27 Males**	Double-blind, placebo controlled between-subject design	32 IU; 45 mins before task	Implicit- aversive conditioning procedure	Neutral (direct vs indirect gaze)	Effect of OT associated with an attenuation of activity in anterior medial temporal and anterior cingulate cortices.	
Random Block Design/Mixed Design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Quintana et al. (2016)	18 Males (23.81 ± 3.33 years)	Double-blind, placebo controlled crossover (within subjects design)	8IU vs 24 IU; 40 mins before task	Explicit ratings of degree of emotion in faces	Happiness, anger (vs neutral)	8 IU dose: OT led to significantly reduced right amygdala activation in response to angry and happy faces 24 IU dose: no significant findings vs placebo	
Block design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Radke et al. (2017)	57 Males (22.4 ± 3 years)	Randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind between subjects design	24 IU; 45 mins before task	Explicit recognition of faces	Happiness, anger	OT decreased right amygdala activation during approach (but not avoidance) of angry faces	
Block design	
No OT induced alterations in connectivity between the right aPFC and the amygdala	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
+Sauer et al. (2012)~	56 Males***	Double-blind, placebo controlled between-subjects design	25 IU; 30 mins before the	Explicit: extended version of Facial emotion recognition task (Hariri)	Happiness, fear, anger	CC genotype showed higher activation of left fusiform gyrus during visual processing of social stimuli.	
start of fMRI experiment	
Under OT activation differences between genotypes were more evident	
Block design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Shin et al. (2015)	16 Males (31.3 ± 7.6)	Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover (within subjects) design	40 IU; 45 mins before FMRI scan	Implicit responses to emotional faces	Happiness, fear (vs neutral)	Overall, OT increased bilateral amygdala activation in controls, however posthoc analysis showed attenuated activation in response to the fearful faces and increased activation in response to happy faces	
Block design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Spengler et al. (2017)	116 Males (24.7 ± 4.4 years)	Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled between subjects (dose) crossover (time) design	Varied- 12/24/48 IU and 15/45/75 mins before task	Explicit responses to morphed emotional faces	Happiness, fear (vs neutral)	24 IU Dose: significantly reduced the response to fearful faces in the left amygdala; high intensity emotion response only significant at 45 minutes	
Event-related design	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Voorthuis et al. (2014)	50 Females (19.66 ± 1.45 years)	Randomised, placebo-controlled, between subjects design	16 IU; 50-60 mins before task	iFEEL paradigm- tested implicit vs explicit responding to infant emotional faces	Not specified	OT increased activation in IFG, MTG and STG in emotion recognition vs gender recognition (but decreased performance on the IFEEL picture task)	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	
Wittfoth-Schardt et al. (2012)	19 Males (39.3 ± 6.2 years)	Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled within-subjects design	24 IU; 30 mins before FMRI	Implicit responses- asked to attentively view only	Friendly- level of attachment varied (own child vs other child)	OT reduced activation and functional connectivity of the left GP with reward- and attachment-related regions responsive to pictures of children’s faces	
Event-related design	
Key

aPFC= anterior prefrontal cortex; BOLD= Blood oxygenation level-dependent; CF= calcarine fissure; EFMT= Emotional Face Matching Task; EPI= Echo planar imaging; FG= fusiform gyrus; fMRI= Functional magnetic resonance imaging; FEW= Family-wise error; FWHM= Full-width at falf-maximum; GLM= General linear model; GP= Globus pallidus; IFG= Inferior frontal gyrus; OT= Oxytocin; PL= Placebo; MDBF = multidimensional mood questionnaire; MFG= Middle frontal gyrus; MTG= midtemporal gyrus; mPFC= medial prefrontal cortex; PSC= Percent signal change; REM= Random-effects model; ROI= Region of Interest; SPC= superior parietal cortex ; SPM= Statistical parametric mapping; STG= superior temporal gyrus; T= Tesla; VTA= ventral tegmental area; WBA= Whole Brain Analysis.

* All ‘trauma-exposed’ controls; **OT group n = 15 (mean age 25.5 years) Placebo group n = 12 (mean age 24.2 years); ***CC genotype: n=30, mean (25.2±2.76 years); CA/AA genotype: n=25 (24.6±2.42 years); + = These two studies had the same sample, both were imaging-genetics studies; ~ = examined effect of eye-gaze/tracking.



3.2 Key findings in relation to brain region, emotion type, sex and implicit vs explicit paradigms
In the first study of its kind, Kirsch et al. (2005) demonstrated that oxytocin decreased amygdala activation in response to angry and fearful faces in men. Several studies since have supported the hypothesis that oxytocin attenuates brain activity in response to negative facial emotions (fear, anger, disgust and sadness) in male samples. For example, oxytocin reduced activity of the right amygdala in response to fearful and angry faces (Domes et al., 2007); attenuated activation in lateral and dorsal regions of the anterior amygdala (Gamer et al., 2010) right amygdala, left ACC, left midtemporal gyrus (MTG) (Kanat et al., 2015a) and left amygdala (Spengler et al., 2017) in response to fearful faces/stimuli (eyes); reduced left and right amygdala responses to angry stimuli (Kanat et al., 2015b); and decreased activity in the right ACC, right middle frontal gyrus, right premotor and left superior parietal cortex in response to sad vs neutral faces (Labuschagne et al., 2012). Luo et al. (2017) showed that oxytocin reduced activity in left and right ACC, left and right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) to fearful faces, and left and right IFG to angry faces and sad faces, all with a neutral contrast.

In contrast, in three studies with female subjects, oxytocin increased brain activity in response to negative emotions. Domes et al. (2007) demonstrated that oxytocin enhanced activity in the left amygdala, fusiform gyrus and superior temporal gyrus in response to fearful faces and in inferior frontal gyrus in response to angry faces in healthy women, while Bertsch et al. (2013) demonstrated enhanced right, centrally located amygdala activation in response to fearful faces with oxytocin in their healthy controls. Luo et al. (2017) demonstrated increased activity in response to oxytocin in right IFG to angry faces, left ACC, left insula and left and right IFG to fearful faces, and left and right IFG to sad faces. A notable exception to the patterns in males and females was the study by Koch et al. (2016b), which showed no significant main effect of oxytocin on left and right amygdala reactivity towards emotional faces in either sex.

Findings for brain responses to positive emotional faces (happiness) were more equivocal. In studies in men, oxytocin variously reduced activity of the right amygdala (Domes et al., 2007; Quintana et al., 2016), bilateral amygdala (Shin et al., 2015), and right medial prefrontal cortex, right ACC, left middle frontal gyrus, left precuneus, left fusiform gyrus, left calcarine fissure and cerebellum (Labuschagne et al., 2012) in response to happy faces, but enhanced activation in lateral and dorsal regions of the anterior amygdala (Gamer et al., 2010) and right superior temporal gyrus (Labuschagne et al., 2012). In females, oxytocin led to significantly stronger activation of the ventral tegmental area to cues of high social reward (happy faces) and enhanced IFG in response to happy faces (Domes et al., 2010). Outcomes based on implicit vs explicit facial emotion paradigms are shown in Table 2, and implications are discussed below.Table 2 Findings in relation to implicit vs explicit paradigms.

Table 2Modulation of:	Effect of oxytocin with Implicit paradigm Males	Effect of oxytocin with Implicit paradigm Females	Effect of oxytocin with Explicit Paradigm Males	Effect of oxytocin with Explicit Paradigm Females	
Amygdala	Yes		Yes	Yes	
Domes et al. (2007) (↓, right)		Gamer et al. (2010) (↓, right to fear, ↑ to happiness)		
Kanat (2015a) (↓, right)		Kanat et al. (2015b) ROI: OT potently ↓ left and right)		
Shin (↓, right to fear, ↑ to happiness)		Kirsch et al. (2005) (↓ left)	Bertsch et al. (2013) (↑, right)	
Radke (↓, right)		Quintana et al. (2016) (↓, right)	Domes et al. (2010) (↑, left)	
Montag et al. (2013) (see Table 1)		Radke et al. (2017) (↓, right)		
Spengler et al. (2017) (↓, left)	
No	No	No	No	
Domes et al. (2014)	Groppe et al. (2013)			
Petrovic et al. (2008) (aversive conditioning procedure)		Koch et al. (2016a) (↓, right)	Koch et al. (2016a)	
Montag et al. (2013) (gaze task)				
Sauer et al. (2012)	
Cortical/other	Domes et al. (2007) (prefrontal, temporal, brainstem)			Domes et al. (2010) (FG and STG, IFG)	
Domes et al. (2014) (IFG, FG)	Groppe et al. (2013) (VTA)	Kanat et al. (2015b) (FG, brainstem, striatecortex)	
Kanat et al. (2015a) (ACC, MTG; fear)	Luo et al. 2017 (IFG, dACC, anterior insula)	Labuschagne et al. (2012) (multiple, see Table 1)	
Koch et al. (2016a)	
Luo 2017 (IFG, dACC, anterior insula)	
Petrovic et al. (2008) (temporal and ACC)	
Functional connectivity	Wittfoth-Schardt et al. (2012)		Gorka et al. (2015)	Luo et al. 2017.	
(↓ left GP with reward regions)		(↓ amygdala to insula and mid/Dacc0 Kirsch et al. (2005) (↓amygdala connectivity to brainstem0	(↓ amygdala, ACC and IFG)	
Koch et al. (2016) (↓ right BLA to left dACC connectivity)	


3.3 Functional connectivity and eye gaze
Kirsch et al. (2005) first demonstrated that oxytocin decreased amygdala connectivity to the brain stem in response to fearful and angry faces in healthy subjects. Other studies including healthy subjects have since demonstrated reduced connectivity in response to oxytocin when responding to emotional faces. When processing happy, fearful and angry faces, Gorka et al. (2015) demonstrated that oxytocin reduced amygdala connectivity to insula and mid/dorsal ACC, while Koch et al. (2016a) demonstrated that oxytocin decreased right basolateral to left dorsal ACC connectivity in males. Wittfoth-Schardt et al. (2012) showed that oxytocin reduced functional connectivity of the left globus pallidus with reward- and attachment-related regions responsive to pictures of children's faces. Luo et al. (2017) showed sex-dependent effects on amygdala, ACC and IFG functional connectivity that were mainly driven by reduced coupling in women following oxytocin. However, Radke et al. (2017) found no oxytocin-induced alterations in connectivity between regions examined (right anterior prefrontal cortex and amygdala).

Five of the studies identified for this review examined the effect of eye gaze on outcome measures. In males, Petrovic et al. (2008) demonstrated abolition by oxytocin of differential negative affective ratings in faces exposed to an aversive conditioning. In amygdala and fusiform gyrus, this modulation was stronger for faces with direct gaze, relative to averted gaze, consistent with a relative specificity for socially relevant cues. Gamer et al. (2010) demonstrated that oxytocin increased the likelihood of reflexive gaze shifts toward the eye region irrespective of the depicted emotional expression. Sauer et al. (2012) showed that genotype (of OXTR) led to differential activation of left fusiform gyrus activation during a gaze processing task. Analysing both substance conditions separately led to a higher activation for A- carriers compared with A+ under oxytocin, but not under placebo. Using the same sample, in a further study exclusively examining the effect of oxytocin on eye gaze, Montag et al. (2013) showed that a separate genetic variation of the OXTR gene (rs401015) modulated right amygdala activity for direct vs averted gaze under influence of oxytocin. This interaction was due to increased activation to directed gaze and decreased activation to averted gaze under oxytocin in TC carriers. In females, oxytocin resulted in enhanced right, more centrally located amygdala activation in response to fearful faces with initial fixation on the eye region in those in the oxytocin condition. Only Domes et al. (2010, also in females) failed to demonstrate a differential effect of eye gaze; their observed effects of oxytocin were independent of fixation pattern to specific sections of the facial stimuli as revealed by eye tracking.

3.4 GRADE scoring
An overall GRADE score of 1 (very low) was allocated to the current review. This was based on:– Type of evidence: evidence provided by RCTs (+4);

– Quality: problems with two ‘quality’ elements (sparse data and methodological concerns) (−2);

– Consistency: problems with one ‘consistency’ element (lack of agreement between studies) (−1).

– Directness: population and outcomes broadly generalizable (0);

– Effect size: not all effect sizes >2 or <0.5 and significant; or if OR/RR/HR not significant (0).



4 Discussion
The aim of this review was to examine the evidence for modulation by oxytocin of neural processing of responses to facial emotions, as measured by fMRI. Previous reviews on the effects of oxytocin on response to facial emotion have focussed on effects on task performance only (Leppanen et al., 2017, Shahrestani et al., 2013), or more broadly on oxytocin-neuroimaging studies (Bethlehem et al., 2013, Kanat et al., 2014). Meta-analyses examining the effect of oxytocin on specific brain regions (Wang et al., 2017, Wigton et al., 2015) have discussed response to facial emotions but have not separately analysed neuroimaging data for the effect of oxytocin specific to facial emotion response tasks. Given the importance of neural processing of facial emotion to emotion recognition and social cognition, we believe the specific effects of oxytocin in healthy subjects was an important consideration warranting further exploration and therefore performed this review. Further, we wished to consider differential outcomes with the use of implicit vs explicit paradigms for facial emotion recognition. Finally, we wished to consider mediating roles of eye gaze, which was examined in some of the studies, and has been suggested to play an important role in processing of facial emotion, and polymorphisms of OXTR, which are thought to influence the effect of oxytocin.

As expected, there were significant effects of oxytocin in all studies identified, with evidence for modulation by oxytocin of key social brain regions, including during processing of direct vs indirect eye gaze. Also as expected, given previous research on oxytocin, these effects were mediated by other factors, including sex and emotion type, in many of the studies. Comparison of implicit vs explicit paradigms however did not reveal a clear pattern of differential effects.

4.1 Differential effects of oxytocin relative to brain region and hemisphere
The most frequently identified region for effects of oxytocin on brain activity was the amygdala (twelve studies). This was not unexpected, given the key role the amygdala has been shown to play in social brain function (Adolphs, 2010, Heim et al., 2009) and evidence for direct action of oxytocin in the amygdala (Heinrichs et al., 2009, Landgraf and Neumann, 2004). It is worth noting however that all of these studies, except Domes et al. (2010), used the amygdala for region of interest (ROI) analysis, which may have biased the results. In contrast, other brain regions were mostly identified when whole brain analysis (WBA) was employed.

In three studies (Domes et al., 2010; Kirsch et al., 2005; Spengler et al., 2017), effects were observed exclusively in the left amygdala; in five (Bertsch et al., 2013; Domes et al., 2007; Kanat et al., 2015a; Quintana et al., 2016; Radke et al., 2017), effects were observed exclusively in the right amygdala; while in three others (Gamer et al., 2010; Kanat et al., 2015b; Shin et al., 2015) effects were observed in bilateral amygdalae. There is some evidence to suggest lateralisation of amygdala in relation to social brain function in humans. For example, (Murray, 2007) suggested a role for the left amygdala in the reward system. A review of previous studies of the role of the amygdala in facial emotion recognition, while yielding some apparently conflicting results, concluded that unconscious (masked) processing is mediated more readily by the right amygdala, and conscious processing more readily by the left amygdala (Markowitsch, 1999). This factor may help to explain the apparent discrepancy across studies, as all three studies with findings exclusively in left amygdala used explicit paradigms (though studies with significant findings in right and bilateral amygdalae used both implicit and explicit tasks). In relation to specific type of emotion, Lanteaume et al. (2007) found that the left amygdala, when stimulated, induced positive emotions, while the right amygdala induced negative emotion. This would not explain the disparity of findings in our review however, as activations were found for both positive and negative emotions in both left and right amygdalae.

Gamer et al. (2010) report more specific neuroanatomical localisation within the amygdala than in the other studies, identifying lateral and dorsal regions of the anterior amygdala as having localised activity. In healthy humans, functional neuroimaging studies have helped elucidate differential roles for amygdala subregions in different sensory modalities (Morris et al., 2001), different valences of auditory stimuli (Ball et al., 2007, Frühholz and Grandjean, 2013), functional connectivity in generalised anxiety disorder (Etkin et al., 2009), and response to SSRIs in social anxiety disorder (Faria et al., 2012). In psychopathy, a model of differential amygdala activation has been described in which the basolateral amygdala (BLA) is underactive while the activity of the central amygdala (CeA) is of average to above average levels (Moul et al., 2012). Related to facial emotion recognition, Goosens et al., localised facial expression-evoked signal changes bilaterally in the superficial amygdala, in contrast to non-social visual stimuli (Goossens et al., 2009), suggesting that this subregion selectively extracts the social value of incoming sensory information. Hence, differentiating simply between right and left amygdala response may not be sufficiently discriminating in relation to effects of oxytocin on brain function. Further, oxytocin also appears to reduce connectivity between the amygdala and both cortical (insula and mid/dorsal ACC; Gorka et al., 2015) and brainstem (Kirsch et al., 2005) regions in healthy men, suggesting that oxytocin's effects may be in part through modulation of both top-down and bottom-up processes involving the amygdala.

The fusiform gyrus was also implicated in a number of studies (Domes et al., 2014; Domes et al., 2010; Kanat et al., 2015b; Petrovic et al., 2008; Sauer et al., 2012). It has been suggested that the role of the fusiform gyrus is specific to facial emotion recognition (Parvizi et al., 2012) and this has been the most consistently activated brain region in response to tasks incorporating facial stimuli (Wigton et al., 2015). Other regions of the temporal lobe were also implicated, including the anterior and medial temporal lobe (Petrovic et al., 2008), the superior temporal gyrus (Domes et al., 2010; Voorthuis et al., 2014) and the middle temporal gyrus (Domes et al., 2007; Domes et al., 2010; Voorthuis et al., 2014; Wittfoth-Schardt et al., 2012). As the meta-analysis by Wigton et al. (2015) demonstrated, overall, oxytocin appears to have sex-mediated effects in the temporal lobes, with increased activation in the temporal lobes in women and generally attenuated activation in the temporal lobes in men.

The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) was impacted by oxytocin in two studies (Kanat et al., 2015a; Labuschagne et al., 2012). While the ACC plays an important role in cognitive tasks such as choice prediction (Kennerley et al., 2011), it has also been shown to be recruited in tasks such as emotional recall imagery and emotional tasks with cognitive demand (Phan et al., 2002). Oxytocin attenuated ACC activity in response to negative emotions in both studies, suggesting oxytocin influences top-down cortical modulation of response to emotional faces in the ACC. Activity in the insula has also been previously associated with emotion regulation (Phan et al., 2002), and left insular hyperactivation after oxytocin administration has been demonstrated by a recent meta-analysis (Wigton et al., 2015). However, the role of the insula appears to be primarily related to modulation of risk prediction and reward anticipation in a social context (Wigton et al., 2015). In our review, only one study (Domes et al., 2010) implicated the insula, demonstrating left insular activation in response to fearful, angry and happy faces. This study was with female subjects, but had a small sample (n = 16), and so inferences about sex-specific effects of oxytocin on the insula in processing facial emotion are of limited value.

Taken together, these studies emphasise the importance of a more nuanced understanding of brain regions involved in facial emotion recognition, particularly the amygdala. As functional imaging methodology and resolution continues to develop, improved anatomical specificity of functional imaging may help resolve uncertainties about specific effects of oxytocin on individual emotions. A further consideration is the use of ROI analysis in these studies. Given that many of the studies implicated regions other than the amygdala as being important to oxytocin's effects, it no longer seems appropriate to identify the amygdala as the sole region of interest in future study designs.

4.2 Differential effects of oxytocin relative to emotion, sex and implicit vs explicit paradigms
Oxytocin's effects on the brain appear to be dependent in part on the specific emotion in question. In all studies involving male subjects that reported neural responses to facial expression of specific emotions, except one (Domes et al., 2014), oxytocin reduced amygdala activity in response to fearful faces. This is in keeping with meta-analyses of functional neuroimaging studies in normal subjects, which have consistently demonstrated involvement of the amygdala in processing of fear (Murphy et al., 2003, Phan et al., 2002). One possible explanation for modulation by oxytocin is an anxiolytic effect, which has been demonstrated by numerous animal (Amico et al., 2004, Engelmann et al., 1999, Ring et al., 2006, Waldherr and Neumann, 2007, Yoshida et al., 2009) and some human (Guastella et al., 2009, Labuschagne et al., 2010) studies, and is likely to be amygdala-mediated (Viviani et al., 2011, Viviani et al., 2010). This would suggest a potential modulatory role for oxytocin in impaired regulation of facial emotion processing in anxiety disorders, which has been demonstrated in both adults (Demenescu et al., 2010, Goldin et al., 2009) and adolescents (McClure et al., 2014). Indeed, in their subjects with generalised anxiety disorder, Labuschagne et al. (2012) demonstrated that oxytocin significantly reduced heightened activation at baseline in the mPFC/ACC regions to levels similar to that of controls. Furthermore, as impaired fear recognition is thought to be an important factor in antisocial personality disorder (with and without psychopathy) (Blair, 2006, Dolan and Fullam, 2006, Marsh and Blair, 2008), modulation by oxytocin may also have therapeutic value for these disorders. This may be particularly relevant to individuals with antisocial personality disorder without psychopathy, who demonstrate a hyperactive amygdala at baseline (Blair, 2010).

The pattern of attenuation of amygdala responsivity by oxytocin in response to fearful faces extended to angry (Domes et al., 2007; Kanat et al., 2015a; Kirsch et al., 2005) and sad (Labuschagne et al., 2012) faces in other studies in males. In contrast, in response to happy faces, findings for the effects of oxytocin on the amygdala were mixed, with both attenuation (Domes et al., 2007; Quintana et al., 2016; Shin et al., 2015) and enhancement (Gamer et al., 2010; Labuschagne et al., 2012) being demonstrated. This apparent discrepancy reflects inconsistencies from behavioural studies (Shahrestani et al., 2013) and warrants further exploration. Differences in facial emotion paradigms may be a contributory factor, as discussed below.

Oxytocin's effects also appear to be mediated by sex differences. In females, as in males, enhancement of activity was seen in response to happy faces (Domes et al., 2010; Groppe et al., 2013). However, in contrast to males, oxytocin also enhanced neural activity in the amygdala (Bertsch et al., 2013; Domes et al., 2010) and superior temporal gyrus and fusiform gyrus (Domes et al., 2010) in response to fearful faces, and in inferior frontal gyrus in response to angry faces (Domes et al., 2010). Luo et al. (2017) showed that while oxytocin suppressed brain activity in inferior frontal gyrus, dorsal anterior cingulate and anterior insula in response to threatening face stimuli in males, it increased them in females. Further, this study showed further sex-dependent effects in functional connectivity (see Table 1) that were mainly driven by reduced coupling in women following oxytocin.

There are several potential explanations for the apparent differential effects of oxytocin on response to facial emotion in men and women. Although oxytocin modulates both salience and motivational aspects of social cues in both sexes (McCall and Singer, 2012), sex has been shown to moderate the effect of oxytocin on social judgments (Hoge et al., 2014), autonomic nervous system and emotional responses to couple conflict (Ditzen et al., 2012), and amygdala response to social judgements (Gao et al., 2016). Hence, sex is also likely to modulate response to facial emotions, another form of social cue. Further, meta-analysis has demonstrated differences in amygdala responsivity to emotions between men and women at baseline, with women demonstrating greater activation than men in response to negative emotions, particularly in the amygdala, and men exhibiting greater activation than women in the left amygdala, and other regions (Stevens and Hamann, 2012). Also, higher levels of progesterone in women (especially in luteal phase of menstrual cycle), are associated with enhanced sensitivity to fearful faces at baseline, and it may be that intranasal oxytocin further enhances vigilance to signals of potential threat (Domes et al., 2010). Finally, differences in the sensitivity of the oxytocin system to exogenous oxytocin between women and men could be due to modulations by gonadal steroids. Women differ from men in the luteal phase with regard to gonadal steroid hormones (Hawkins and Matzuk, 2008), thus providing a plausible explanation for inconsistent findings between men and women.

Debate persists about whether implicit or explicit responses to emotion are optimal measures of facial emotional processing, and many argue that they should be conceptualised and measured separately (Braunstein et al., 2017, Kliemann et al., 2013). Further, evidence suggests that implicit and explicit processing may have distinct neural substrates, with amygdala and subcortical limbic activity important for the implicit process and the response of the prefrontal cortex for the explicit process (Critchley et al., 2000, Xiao et al., 2016). Our analysis of outcomes based on implicit vs explicit facial emotion paradigms (Table 2) did not reveal any consistent pattern of findings. Most notably, amygdala activation was shown in both males and females using implicit tasks and explicit tasks, while no amygdala activation was observed in other studies using implicit (Domes et al., 2014; Groppe et al., 2013) or explicit (Koch et al., 2016b) tasks. Currently, evidence for differing patterns of oxytocin modulation based on type implicit vs explicit paradigm remains equivocal. Future studies may benefit however from delineating implicit and explicit brain response.

4.3 Differential effects of oxytocin relative to gaze processing
Eye gaze is a central component of identification of human facial emotion (Haxby et al., 2002, Smith et al., 2005). Impairments in eye gaze have been associated with deficits in facial emotion processing, particularly in autism (Guastella et al., 2008). While both averted- and direct-gaze faces are ‘social’ stimuli, in direct gaze, attention is toward the individual, while in averted gaze, the attention is directed toward an extrapersonal spatial location. Thus, it has been suggested that direct gaze is more socially relevant (Haxby et al., 2002; Petrovic et al., 2008). Intranasal oxytocin has been shown gaze specifically toward the eye region of human faces (Guastella et al., 2008), while a more recent study demonstrated that oxytocin differentially modulates eye gaze to social signals (Domes et al., 2013).

Four of the six studies which examined eye gaze processing studies showed an influence of oxytocin on related brain activity. Three (Bertsch et al., 2013; Gamer et al., 2010; Petrovic et al., 2008) showed modulation of the amygdala, while two (Petrovic et al., 2008; Sauer et al., 2012) implicated the fusiform gyrus. Together, these findings are in keeping with previous research, showing that fusifrom gyrus activation is related to processing of direct relative to averted gaze (George et al., 2001), and that amygdala activation has been shown to predict gaze toward fearful eyes (Gamer and Büchel, 2009) and associated with analysis of gaze cues when a person is actively monitoring for emotional gaze events (Hooker et al., 2003). Based on existing evidence, a model may be proposed whereby oxytocin modulates facial emotion recognition in part by activating the amygdala and fusiform gyrus to direct gaze shift towards the eye region. This model would benefit from further investigation using standardised measures of eye gaze and amygdala activation. Of note however, one more recent study showed no effect of oxytocin of gaze fixation (Lischke et al., 2012b).

4.4 Differential effects of oxytocin relative to genotype
There is now a robust body of evidence demonstrating effects of variation in the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) on a range of psychiatric conditions and behavioural measures (Bakermans-Kranenburg and van IJzendoorn, 2014; Meyer-Lindenberg et al., 2011). Both studies in our review examining effect of genotype (Montag et al., 2013; Sauer et al., 2012) demonstrated that variations in a single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of OXTR (rs3796863 and rs401015 respectively) had a significant influence on and neuronal measures of facial emotion/social processing. In Sauer et al., homozygotic risk allele carriers showed slower reaction times and higher activation of left fusiform gyrus during visual processing of social stimuli. Oxytocin appeared to modulate this effect by enhancing activation differences between allele groups. Although Montag et al. (2013) did not observe a main effect of gaze direction on amygdala activity, genetic variation of the OXTR gene (rs401015) modulated right amygdala activity for direct > averted gaze under influence of OT.

Since these studies were published, novel methods (Chiu and Miller, 2016) and large-scale multicentre trials (Ripke et al., 2014) have come increasingly to the fore of molecular genetic research. Future studies examining the impact of genotype on the role of oxytocin will benefit from such approaches, which are more likely to contribute towards causal associations between genotype and neuroimaging and behavioural measures. Studies examining effects of individuals SNPs have yielded the most promising results when focusing on biological measures such as neuroimaging parameters (Bakermans-Kranenburg and van IJzendoorn, 2014). These are more likely to be successful than those focusing on more distal, complex social phenotypes with error-prone assessments (Bakermans-Kranenburg and van IJzendoorn, 2014).

4.5 Other considerations
It should be noted that many of the studies included in this review had small sample size (average 36.5 per group of healthy subjects) and while power calculations were inconsistently reported, many studies were likely significantly underpowered. The issue of low statistical power is a well-recognised criticism in both neuroimaging research (Button et al., 2013; Ioannidis, 2005) and studies involving oxytocin generally (Walum et al., 2016). Studies with low statistical power increase the likelihood of both type I and type II errors, producing poor quality research with ethical implications (Button et al., 2013). Factors which may address the issue of low statistical power include a priori power calculations, transparent disclosure of methods and findings where null findings are demonstrated, pre-registration of study protocols and analysis plans, and making study materials and data available, and working collaboratively to increase power and replicate findings (Button et al., 2013). Further, recent attempts for clearer guidance on power calculation (Durnez et al., 2016) and task design (Durnez et al., 2017) in fMRI studies should help improve quality of research in this area. It is notable that the GRADE score allocated by this review of 1 translates to ‘very low quality’ research, with particular problems due to sparse data, methodological concerns, and lack of agreement between studies.

A further consideration is the potential for publication bias in the published literature. Traditionally, meta-analysis can overcome the issue of statistical power, and can be used to assess publication bias. However, many of the studies returned from this review performed ROI analyses, which cannot be combined with whole-brain analyses in methodologically sound neuroimaging meta-analysis (Radua et al., 2012). Furthermore, meta-analysis requires that the contrasts in individual studies are testing similar constructs – in the current review, there were a relatively low number of studies (five) which could be grouped together. As such, a meta-analysis was not considered a worthwhile addition in this instance.

In conclusion, oxytocin modulates facial emotion processing in key ‘social brain’ areas in normal adults. This effect is mediated by individual differences, including sex and genotype. The evidence for differential response to facial emotions (with or without oxytocin) relative to implicit vs explicit tasks remains equivocal. Oxytocin's effects may be exerted in part through enhanced gaze processing, involving the amygdala and fusiform gyrus. Research in this area to date has been somewhat limited by low statistical power, methodological heterogeneity, and a dearth of multimodal studies. Future studies should ensure controls for individual differences, including sex, physiology, and genotype. Further work will benefit from accurate and transparent power calculation, collaborative projects involving genotyping and other methodologies.

Funding
Dr John Tully is supported by a Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Training Fellowship. Grant no. 200099/Z/15/Z.
==== Refs
References
Adolphs R.   What does the amygdala contribute to social cognition? Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1191 2010 42 61 20392275 
Amico J.  Mantella R.  Vollmer R.  Li X.   Anxiety and stress responses in female oxytocin deficient mice J. Neuroendocrinol. 16 2004 319 324 15089969 
Anagnostou E.  Soorya L.  Chaplin W.  Bartz J.  Halpern D.  Wasserman S.  Wang A.T.  Pepa L.  Tanel N.  Kushki A.   Intranasal oxytocin versus placebo in the treatment of adults with autism spectrum disorders: a randomized controlled trial Mol. Autism 3 2012 16 23216716 
Andari E.  Duhamel J.-R.  Zalla T.  Herbrecht E.  Leboyer M.  Sirigu A.   Promoting social behavior with oxytocin in high-functioning autism spectrum disorders Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107 2010 4389 4394 20160081 
Aoki Y.  Watanabe T.  Abe O.  Kuwabara H.  Yahata N.  Takano Y.  Iwashiro N.  Natsubori T.  Takao H.  Kawakubo Y.   Oxytocin's neurochemical effects in the medial prefrontal cortex underlie recovery of task-specific brain activity in autism: a randomized controlled trial Mol. Psychiatry 20 2015 447 453 25070538 
Bakermans-Kranenburg M.J.  van IJzendoorn M.H.   A sociability gene? Meta-analysis of oxytocin receptor genotype effects in humans Psychiatr. Genet. 24 2014 45 51 23921259 
Ball T.  Rahm B.  Eickhoff S.B.  Schulze-Bonhage A.  Speck O.  Mutschler I.   Response properties of human amygdala subregions: evidence based on functional MRI combined with probabilistic anatomical maps PLoS One 2 2007 e307 17375193 
Bartz J.A.  Zaki J.  Bolger N.  Ochsner K.N.   Social effects of oxytocin in humans: context and person matter Trends Cogn. Sci. 15 2011 301 309 21696997 
Bertrand M.-C.  Sutton H.  Achim A.M.  Malla A.K.  Lepage M.   Social cognitive impairments in first episode psychosis Schizophr. Res. 95 2007 124 133 17630261 
Bertsch K.  Gamer M.  Schmidt B.  Schmidinger I.  Walther S.  Kästel T.  Schnell K.  Büchel C.  Domes G.  Herpertz S.C.   Oxytocin and reduction of social threat hypersensitivity in women with borderline personality disorder Am. J. Psychiatry 170 2013 1169 1177 23982273 
Bethlehem R.A.  van Honk J.  Auyeung B.  Baron-Cohen S.   Oxytocin, brain physiology, and functional connectivity: a review of intranasal oxytocin fMRI studies Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 2013 962 974 23159011 
Blair R.   The emergence of psychopathy: implications for the neuropsychological approach to developmental disorders Cognition 101 2006 414 442 16904094 
Blair R.   Neuroimaging of psychopathy and antisocial behavior: a targeted review Curr. Psychiatry Rep. 12 2010 76 82 20425314 
Boccia M.  Petrusz P.  Suzuki K.  Marson L.  Pedersen C.   Immunohistochemical localization of oxytocin receptors in human brain Neuroscience 253 2013 155 164 24012742 
Braunstein L.M.  Gross J.J.  Ochsner K.N.   Explicit and implicit emotion regulation: a multi-level framework Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 12 2017 1545 1557 28981910 
Button K.S.  Ioannidis J.P.  Mokrysz C.  Nosek B.A.  Flint J.  Robinson E.S.  Munafò M.R.   Power failure: why small sample size undermines the reliability of neuroscience Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14 2013 365 376 23571845 
Cardoso C.  Ellenbogen M.A.  Orlando M.A.  Bacon S.L.  Joober R.   Intranasal oxytocin attenuates the cortisol response to physical stress: a dose–response study Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 2013 399 407 22889586 
Carter C.S.  Grippo A.J.  Pournajafi-Nazarloo H.  Ruscio M.G.  Porges S.W.   Oxytocin, vasopressin and sociality Prog. Brain Res. 170 2008 331 336 18655893 
Carton J.S.  Kessler E.A.  Pape C.L.   Nonverbal decoding skills and relationship well-being in adults J. Nonverbal Behav. 23 1999 91 100 
Chiu C.  Miller S.   Next-Generation Sequencing, Molecular Microbiology 2016 American Society of Microbiology 68 79 
Chung Y.S.  Barch D.  Strube M.   A meta-analysis of mentalizing impairments in adults with schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder Schizophr. Bull. 40 2013 602 616 23686020 
Critchley H.  Daly E.  Phillips M.  Brammer M.  Bullmore E.  Williams S.  Van Amelsvoort T.  Robertson D.  David A.  Murphy D.   Explicit and implicit neural mechanisms for processing of social information from facial expressions: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study Hum. Brain Mapp. 9 2000 93 105 10680766 
Dadds M.R.  MacDonald E.  Cauchi A.  Williams K.  Levy F.  Brennan J.   Nasal oxytocin for social deficits in childhood autism: a randomized controlled trial J. Autism Dev. Disord. 44 2014 521 531 23888359 
De Dreu C.K.  Greer L.L.  Handgraaf M.J.  Shalvi S.  Van Kleef G.A.   Oxytocin modulates selection of allies in intergroup conflict Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B: Biol. Sci. 2011 (rspb20111444) 
De Dreu C.K.  Greer L.L.  Handgraaf M.J.  Shalvi S.  Van Kleef G.A.  Baas M.  Ten Velden F.S.  Van Dijk E.  Feith S.W.   The neuropeptide oxytocin regulates parochial altruism in intergroup conflict among humans Science 328 2010 1408 1411 20538951 
De Dreu C.K.  Greer L.L.  Van Kleef G.A.  Shalvi S.  Handgraaf M.J.   Oxytocin promotes human ethnocentrism Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108 2011 1262 1266 21220339 
Demenescu L.R.  Kortekaas R.  den Boer J.A.  Aleman A.   Impaired attribution of emotion to facial expressions in anxiety and major depression PLoS One 5 2010 e15058 21152015 
Ditzen B.  Nater U.M.  Schaer M.  La Marca R.  Bodenmann G.  Ehlert U.  Heinrichs M.   Sex-specific effects of intranasal oxytocin on autonomic nervous system and emotional responses to couple conflict Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 8 2012 897 902 22842905 
Ditzen B.  Schaer M.  Gabriel B.  Bodenmann G.  Ehlert U.  Heinrichs M.   Intranasal oxytocin increases positive communication and reduces cortisol levels during couple conflict Biol. Psychiatry 65 2009 728 731 19027101 
Dolan M.  Fullam R.   Face affect recognition deficits in personality-disordered offenders: association with psychopathy Psychol. Med. 36 2006 1563 1569 16893483 
Domes G.  Heinrichs M.  Gläscher J.  Büchel C.  Braus D.F.  Herpertz S.C.   Oxytocin attenuates amygdala responses to emotional faces regardless of valence Biol. Psychiatry 62 2007 1187 1190 17617382 
Domes G.  Steiner A.  Porges S.W.  Heinrichs M.   Oxytocin differentially modulates eye gaze to naturalistic social signals of happiness and anger Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 2013 1198 1202 23117026 
Durnez, J., Blair, R., Poldrack, R., 2017. Neurodesign: Optimal Experimental Designs for Task fMRI. bioRxiv, 119594.
Durnez, J., Degryse, J., Moerkerke, B., Seurinck, R., Sochat, V., Poldrack, R., Nichols, T., 2016. Power and Sample Size Calculations for fMRI Studies Based on the Prevalence of Active Peaks. bioRxiv, 049429.
Ellenbogen M.A.  Linnen A.M.  Grumet R.  Cardoso C.  Joober R.   The acute effects of intranasal oxytocin on automatic and effortful attentional shifting to emotional faces Psychophysiology 49 2012 128 137 22092248 
Engelmann M.  Ebner K.  Landgraf R.  Holsboer F.  Wotjak C.   Emotional stress triggers intrahypothalamic but not peripheral release of oxytocin in male rats J. Neuroendocrinol. 11 1999 867 872 10520137 
Etkin A.  Prater K.E.  Schatzberg A.F.  Menon V.  Greicius M.D.   Disrupted amygdalar subregion functional connectivity and evidence of a compensatory network in generalized anxiety disorder Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 66 2009 1361 1372 19996041 
Faria V.  Appel L.  Åhs F.  Linnman C.  Pissiota A.  Frans Ö.  Bani M.  Bettica P.  Pich E.M.  Jacobsson E.   Amygdala subregions tied to SSRI and placebo response in patients with social anxiety disorder Neuropsychopharmacology 37 2012 2222 2232 22617357 
Feldman R.  Gordon I.  Influs M.  Gutbir T.  Ebstein R.P.   Parental oxytocin and early caregiving jointly shape children's oxytocin response and social reciprocity . Neuropsychopharmacology 38 2013 1154 1162 23325323 
Fischer-Shofty M.  Shamay-Tsoory S.  Harari H.  Levkovitz Y.   The effect of intranasal administration of oxytocin on fear recognition Neuropsychologia 48 2010 179 184 19747930 
Frühholz S.  Grandjean D.   Amygdala subregions differentially respond and rapidly adapt to threatening voices Cortex 49 2013 1394 1403 22938844 
Gamer M.  Büchel C.   Amygdala activation predicts gaze toward fearful eyes J. Neurosci. 29 2009 9123 9126 19605649 
Gamer M.  Zurowski B.  Büchel C.   Different amygdala subregions mediate valence-related and attentional effects of oxytocin in humans Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107 2010 9400 9405 20421469 
Gao S.  Becker B.  Luo L.  Geng Y.  Zhao W.  Yin Y.  Hu J.  Gao Z.  Gong Q.  Hurlemann R.   Oxytocin, the peptide that bonds the sexes also divides them Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113 2016 7650 7654 27325780 
George N.  Driver J.  Dolan R.J.   Seen gaze-direction modulates fusiform activity and its coupling with other brain areas during face processing Neuroimage 13 2001 1102 1112 11352615 
Goldin P.R.  Manber T.  Hakimi S.  Canli T.  Gross J.J.   Neural bases of social anxiety disorder: emotional reactivity and cognitive regulation during social and physical threat Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 66 2009 170 180 19188539 
Goossens L.  Kukolja J.  Onur O.A.  Fink G.R.  Maier W.  Griez E.  Schruers K.  Hurlemann R.   Selective processing of social stimuli in the superficial amygdala Hum. Brain Mapp. 30 2009 3332 3338 19347877 
Gorka S.M.  Fitzgerald D.A.  Labuschagne I.  Hosanagar A.  Wood A.G.  Nathan P.J.  Phan K.L.   Oxytocin modulation of amygdala functional connectivity to fearful faces in generalized social anxiety disorder Neuropsychopharmacology 40 2015 278 286 24998619 
Groppe S.E.  Gossen A.  Rademacher L.  Hahn A.  Westphal L.  Grunder G.  Spreckelmeyer K.N.   Oxytocin influences processing of socially relevant cues in the ventral tegmental area of the human brain Biol. Psychiatry 74 2013 172 179 23419544 
Guastella A.J.  Einfeld S.L.  Gray K.M.  Rinehart N.J.  Tonge B.J.  Lambert T.J.  Hickie I.B.   Intranasal oxytocin improves emotion recognition for youth with autism spectrum disorders Biol. Psychiatry 67 2010 692 694 19897177 
Guastella A.J.  Howard A.L.  Dadds M.R.  Mitchell P.  Carson D.S.   A randomized controlled trial of intranasal oxytocin as an adjunct to exposure therapy for social anxiety disorder Psychoneuroendocrinology 34 2009 917 923 19246160 
Guastella A.J.  MacLeod C.   A critical review of the influence of oxytocin nasal spray on social cognition in humans: evidence and future directions Horm. Behav. 61 2012 410 418 22265852 
Guastella A.J.  Mitchell P.B.  Dadds M.R.   Oxytocin increases gaze to the eye region of human faces Biol. Psychiatry 63 2008 3 5 17888410 
Guyatt G.H.  Oxman A.D.  Vist G.E.  Kunz R.  Falck-Ytter Y.  Alonso-Coello P.  Schünemann H.J.   Rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations: grade: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations BMJ: Br. Med. J. 336 2008 924 18436948 
Hawkins S.M.  Matzuk M.M.   The Menstrual Cycle Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1135 2008 10 18 18574203 
Haxby J.V.  Hoffman E.A.  Gobbini M.I.   Human neural systems for face recognition and social communication Biol. Psychiatry 51 2002 59 67 11801231 
Heim C.  Young L.  Newport D.  Mletzko T.  Miller A.  Nemeroff C.   Lower CSF oxytocin concentrations in women with a history of childhood abuse Mol. Psychiatry 14 2009 954 958 18957940 
Heinrichs M.  Baumgartner T.  Kirschbaum C.  Ehlert U.   Social support and oxytocin interact to suppress cortisol and subjective responses to psychosocial stress Biol. Psychiatry 54 2003 1389 1398 14675803 
Heinrichs M.  von Dawans B.  Domes G.   Oxytocin, vasopressin, and human social behavior Front. Neuroendocrinol. 30 2009 548 557 19505497 
Hoge E.A.  Anderson E.  Lawson E.A.  Bui E.  Fischer L.E.  Khadge S.D.  Barrett L.F.  Simon N.M.   Gender moderates the effect of oxytocin on social judgments Hum. Psychopharmacol.: Clin. Exp. 29 2014 299 304 
Hollander E.  Bartz J.  Chaplin W.  Phillips A.  Sumner J.  Soorya L.  Anagnostou E.  Wasserman S.   Oxytocin increases retention of social cognition in autism Biol. Psychiatry 61 2007 498 503 16904652 
Hooker C.I.  Paller K.A.  Gitelman D.R.  Parrish T.B.  Mesulam M.-M.  Reber P.J.   Brain networks for analyzing eye gaze Cogn. Brain Res. 17 2003 406 418 
Ioannidis J.P.   Why most published research findings are false PLoS Med. 2 2005 e124 16060722 
Kanat M.  Heinrichs M.  Domes G.   Oxytocin and the social brain: neural mechanisms and perspectives in human research Brain Res. 1580 2014 160 171 24216134 
Kanat M.  Heinrichs M.  Mader I.  Van Elst L.T.  Domes G.   Oxytocin modulates amygdala reactivity to masked fearful eyes Neuropsychopharmacology 40 2015 2632 2638 25881796 
Kanat M.  Heinrichs M.  Schwarzwald R.  Domes G.   Oxytocin attenuates neural reactivity to masked threat cues from the eyes Neuropsychopharmacology 40 2015 287 295 25047745 
Kennerley S.W.  Behrens T.E.  Wallis J.D.   Double dissociation of value computations in orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate neurons Nat. Neurosci. 14 2011 1581 1589 22037498 
Kim H.S.  Sherman D.K.  Sasaki J.Y.  Xu J.  Chu T.Q.  Ryu C.  Suh E.M.  Graham K.  Taylor S.E.   Culture, distress, and oxytocin receptor polymorphism (OXTR) interact to influence emotional support seeking Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107 2010 15717 15721 20724662 
Kirsch P.  Esslinger C.  Chen Q.  Mier D.  Lis S.  Siddhanti S.  Gruppe H.  Mattay V.S.  Gallhofer B.  Meyer-Lindenberg A.   Oxytocin modulates neural circuitry for social cognition and fear in humans J. Neurosci. 25 2005 11489 11493 16339042 
Kliemann D.  Rosenblau G.  Bölte S.  Heekeren H.R.  Dziobek I.   Face puzzle—two new video-based tasks for measuring explicit and implicit aspects of facial emotion recognition Front. Psychol. 2013 4 23378839 
Koch S.B.  van Zuiden M.  Nawijn L.  Frijling J.L.  Veltman D.J.  Olff M.   Intranasal oxytocin normalizes amygdala functional connectivity in posttraumatic stress disorder Neuropsychopharmacology 41 2016 2041 26741286 
Koch S.B.J.  Van Zuiden M.  Nawijn L.  Frijling J.L.  Veltman D.J.  Olff M.   Intranasal oxytocin administration dampens amygdala reactivity towards emotional faces in male and female PTSD patients Neuropsychopharmacology 41 2016 1495 1504 26404844 
Labuschagne I.  Phan K.L.  Wood A.  Angstadt M.  Chua P.  Heinrichs M.  Stout J.C.  Nathan P.J.   Oxytocin attenuates amygdala reactivity to fear in generalized social anxiety disorder Neuropsychopharmacology 35 2010 2403 2413 20720535 
Labuschagne I.  Phan K.L.  Wood A.  Angstadt M.  Chua P.  Heinrichs M.  Stout J.C.  Nathan P.J.   Medial frontal hyperactivity to sad faces in generalized social anxiety disorder and modulation by oxytocin Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 15 2012 883 896 21996304 
Landgraf R.  Neumann I.D.   Vasopressin and oxytocin release within the brain: a dynamic concept of multiple and variable modes of neuropeptide communication Front. Neuroendocrinol. 25 2004 150 176 15589267 
Lanteaume L.  Khalfa S.  Régis J.  Marquis P.  Chauvel P.  Bartolomei F.   Emotion induction after direct intracerebral stimulations of human amygdala Cereb. Cortex 17 2007 1307 1313 16880223 
Leppanen J.  Ng K.W.  Tchanturia K.  Treasure J.   Meta-analysis of the effects of intranasal oxytocin on interpretation and expression of emotions Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 78 2017 125 144 28467893 
Lischke A.  Berger C.  Prehn K.  Heinrichs M.  Herpertz S.C.  Domes G.   Intranasal oxytocin enhances emotion recognition from dynamic facial expressions and leaves eye-gaze unaffected Psychoneuroendocrinology 37 2012 475 481 21862223 
Lischke A.  Gamer M.  Berger C.  Grossmann A.  Hauenstein K.  Heinrichs M.  Herpertz S.C.  Domes G.   Oxytocin increases amygdala reactivity to threatening scenes in females Psychoneuroendocrinology 37 2012 1431 1438 22365820 
Losh M.  Adolphs R.  Poe M.D.  Couture S.  Penn D.  Baranek G.T.  Piven J.   Neuropsychological profile of autism and the broad autism phenotype Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 66 2009 518 526 19414711 
Luo L.  Becker B.  Geng Y.  Zhao Z.  Gao S.  Zhao W.  Yao S.  Zheng X.  Ma X.  Gao Z.   Sex-dependent neural effect of oxytocin during subliminal processing of negative emotion faces Neuroimage 2017 
Markowitsch H.J.   Differential contribution of right and left amygdala to affective information processing Behav. Neurol. 11 1999 233 244 
Marsh A.A.  Blair R.   Deficits in facial affect recognition among antisocial populations: a meta-analysis Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 32 2008 454 465 17915324 
Marsh A.A.  Henry H.Y.  Pine D.S.  Gorodetsky E.K.  Goldman D.  Blair R.   The influence of oxytocin administration on responses to infant faces and potential moderation by OXTR genotype Psychopharmacology 224 2012 469 476 22763666 
Marsh A.A.  Kozak M.N.  Ambady N.   Accurate identification of fear facial expressions predicts prosocial behavior Emotion 7 2007 239 17516803 
McCall C.  Singer T.   The animal and human neuroendocrinology of social cognition, motivation and behavior Nat. Neurosci. 15 2012 681 688 22504348 
McClure E.B.  Nowicki S. Jr   Associations between social anxiety and nonverbal processing skill in preadolescent boys and girls J. Nonverbal Behav. 25 2001 3 19 
McClure, E.B., Pope, K., Hoberman, A.J., Pine, D.S., Leibenluft, E., 2014. Facial Expression Recognition in Adolescents with Mood and Anxiety Disorders.
Meinlschmidt G.  Heim C.   Sensitivity to intranasal oxytocin in adult men with early parental separation Biol. Psychiatry 61 2007 1109 1111 17141739 
Meyer-Lindenberg A.  Domes G.  Kirsch P.  Heinrichs M.   Oxytocin and vasopressin in the human brain: social neuropeptides for translational medicine Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12 2011 524 21852800 
Moher D.  Liberati A.  Tetzlaff J.  Altman D.G.  Group P.   Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement PLoS Med. 6 2009 e1000097 19621072 
Montag C.  Sauer C.  Reuter M.  Kirsch P.   An interaction between oxytocin and a genetic variation of the oxytocin receptor modulates amygdala activity toward direct gaze: evidence from a pharmacological imaging genetics study Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 263 2013 169 175 
Morris J.S.  Buchel C.  Dolan R.J.   Parallel neural responses in amygdala subregions and sensory cortex during implicit fear conditioning Neuroimage 13 2001 1044 1052 11352610 
Moul C.  Killcross S.  Dadds M.R.   A model of differential amygdala activation in psychopathy Psychol. Rev. 119 2012 789 22800411 
Murphy F.C.  Nimmo-Smith I.  Lawrence A.D.   Functional neuroanatomy of emotions: a meta-analysis Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 3 2003 207 233 14672157 
Murray E.A.   The amygdala, reward and emotion Trends Cogn. Sci. 11 2007 489 497 17988930 
Norman G.J.  Hawkley L.  Luhmann M.  Ball A.B.  Cole S.W.  Berntson G.G.  Cacioppo J.T.   Variation in the oxytocin receptor gene influences neurocardiac reactivity to social stress and HPA function: a population based study Horm. Behav. 61 2012 134 139 22146101 
Parvizi J.  Jacques C.  Foster B.L.  Withoft N.  Rangarajan V.  Weiner K.S.  Grill-Spector K.   Electrical stimulation of human fusiform face-selective regions distorts face perception J. Neurosci. 32 2012 14915 14920 23100414 
Petrovic P.  Kalisch R.  Singer T.  Dolan R.J.   Oxytocin attenuates affective evaluations of conditioned faces and amygdala activity J. Neurosci. 28 2008 6607 6615 18579733 
Phan K.L.  Wager T.  Taylor S.F.  Liberzon I.   Functional neuroanatomy of emotion: a meta-analysis of emotion activation studies in PET and fMRI Neuroimage 16 2002 331 348 12030820 
Quintana D.S.   Revisiting non-significant effects of intranasal oxytocin using equivalence testing Psychoneuroendocrinology 87 2018 127 130 29065361 
Quintana D.S.  Westlye L.T.  Alnæs D.  Rustan Ø.G.  Kaufmann T.  Smerud K.T.  Mahmoud R.A.  Djupesland P.G.  Andreassen O.A.   Low dose intranasal oxytocin delivered with Breath Powered device dampens amygdala response to emotional stimuli: A peripheral effect-controlled within-subjects randomized dose-response fMRI trial Psychoneuroendocrinology 69 2016 180 188 27107209 
Radke S.  Volman I.  Kokal I.  Roelofs K.  de Bruijn E.R.  Toni I.   Oxytocin reduces amygdala responses during threat approach Psychoneuroendocrinology 79 2017 160 166 28285187 
Radua J.  Mataix-Cols D.  Phillips M.L.  El-Hage W.  Kronhaus D.  Cardoner N.  Surguladze S.   A new meta-analytic method for neuroimaging studies that combines reported peak coordinates and statistical parametric maps Eur. Psychiatry 27 2012 605 611 21658917 
Ring R.H.  Malberg J.E.  Potestio L.  Ping J.  Boikess S.  Luo B.  Schechter L.E.  Rizzo S.  Rahman Z.  Rosenzweig-Lipson S.   Anxiolytic-like activity of oxytocin in male mice: behavioral and autonomic evidence, therapeutic implications Psychopharmacology 185 2006 218 225 16418825 
Ripke S.  Neale B.M.  Corvin A.  Walters J.T.  Farh K.-H.  Holmans P.A.  Lee P.  Bulik-Sullivan B.  Collier D.A.  Huang H.   Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci Nature 511 2014 421 25056061 
Rodrigues S.M.  Saslow L.R.  Garcia N.  John O.P.  Keltner D.   Oxytocin receptor genetic variation relates to empathy and stress reactivity in humans Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106 2009 21437 21441 19934046 
Saphire-Bernstein S.  Way B.M.  Kim H.S.  Sherman D.K.  Taylor S.E.   Oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) is related to psychological resources Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108 2011 15118 15122 21896752 
Sauer C.  Montag C.  Wörner C.  Kirsch P.  Reuter M.   Effects of a common variant in the CD38 gene on social processing in an oxytocin challenge study: possible links to autism Neuropsychopharmacology 37 2012 1474 1482 22278094 
Schulze L.  Lischke A.  Greif J.  Herpertz S.C.  Heinrichs M.  Domes G.   Oxytocin increases recognition of masked emotional faces Psychoneuroendocrinology 36 2011 1378 1382 21477929 
Shahrestani S.  Kemp A.H.  Guastella A.J.   The impact of a single administration of intranasal oxytocin on the recognition of basic emotions in humans: a meta-analysis Neuropsychopharmacology 38 2013 1929 1936 23575742 
Shin N.Y.  Park H.Y.  Jung W.H.  Park J.W.  Yun J.Y.  Jang J.H.  Kim S.N.  Han H.J.  Kim S.Y.  Kang D.H.  Kwon J.S.   Effects of oxytocin on neural response to facial expressions in patients with schizophrenia Neuropsychopharmacology 40 2015 1919 1927 25666311 
Smith M.L.  Cottrell G.W.  Gosselin F.  Schyns P.G.   Transmitting and decoding facial expressions Psychol. Sci. 16 2005 184 189 15733197 
Spengler F.B.  Schultz J.  Scheele D.  Essel M.  Maier W.  Heinrichs M.  Hurlemann R.   Kinetics and dose dependency of intranasal oxytocin effects on amygdala reactivity Biol. Psychiatry 2017 
Stevens J.S.  Hamann S.   Sex differences in brain activation to emotional stimuli: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies Neuropsychologia 50 2012 1578 1593 22450197 
Strathearn L.  Fonagy P.  Amico J.  Montague P.R.   Adult attachment predicts maternal brain and oxytocin response to infant cues Neuropsychopharmacology 34 2009 2655 2666 19710635 
Tost H.  Kolachana B.  Hakimi S.  Lemaitre H.  Verchinski B.A.  Mattay V.S.  Weinberger D.R.  Meyer–Lindenberg A.   A common allele in the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) impacts prosocial temperament and human hypothalamic-limbic structure and function Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107 2010 13936 13941 20647384 
Tost H.  Kolachana B.  Verchinski B.A.  Bilek E.  Goldman A.L.  Mattay V.S.  Weinberger D.R.  Meyer-Lindenberg A.   Neurogenetic effects of OXTR rs2254298 in the extended limbic system of healthy Caucasian adults Biol. Psychiatry 70 2011 e37 e39 21872215 
Uljarevic M.  Hamilton A.   Recognition of emotions in autism: a formal meta-analysis J. Autism Dev. Disord. 43 2013 1517 1526 23114566 
Viviani D.  Charlet A.  van den Burg E.  Robinet C.  Hurni N.  Abatis M.  Magara F.  Stoop R.   Oxytocin selectively gates fear responses through distinct outputs from the central amygdala Science 333 2011 104 107 21719680 
Viviani D.  Terrettaz T.  Magara F.  Stoop R.   Oxytocin enhances the inhibitory effects of diazepam in the rat central medial amygdala Neuropharmacology 58 2010 62 68 19589347 
Voorthuis A.  Riem M.M.E.  Van Ijzendoorn M.H.  Bakermans-Kranenburg M.J.   Reading the mind in the infant eyes: paradoxical effects of oxytocin on neural activity and emotion recognition in watching pictures of infant faces Brain Res. 1580 2014 151 159 24184576 
Waldherr M.  Neumann I.D.   Centrally released oxytocin mediates mating-induced anxiolysis in male rats Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104 2007 16681 16684 17925443 
Walum H.  Lichtenstein P.  Neiderhiser J.M.  Reiss D.  Ganiban J.M.  Spotts E.L.  Pedersen N.L.  Anckarsäter H.  Larsson H.  Westberg L.   Variation in the oxytocin receptor gene is associated with pair-bonding and social behavior Biol. Psychiatry 71 2012 419 426 22015110 
Walum H.  Waldman I.D.  Young L.J.   Statistical and methodological considerations for the interpretation of intranasal oxytocin studies Biol. Psychiatry 79 2016 251 257 26210057 
Wang D.  Yan X.  Li M.  Ma Y.   Neural substrates underlying the effects of oxytocin: a quantitative meta-analysis of pharmaco-imaging studies Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 2017 
Watanabe, T., Abe, O., Kuwabara, H., Yahata, N., Takano, Y., Iwashiro, N., Natsubori, T., Aoki, Y., Takao, H., Kawakubo, Y., 2013. Oxytocin mitigates socio-communicational deficits of autism with recovery of medial prefrontal activity: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA Psychiatry.
Wigton R.  Jocham Radua P.A.  Averbeck B.  Meyer-Lindenberg A.  McGuire P.  Shergill S.S.  Fusar-Poli P.   Neurophysiological effects of acute oxytocin administration: systematic review and meta-analysis of placebo-controlled imaging studies J. Psychiatry Neurosci.: JPN 40 2015 E1 25520163 
Wittfoth-Schardt D.  Gründing J.  Wittfoth M.  Lanfermann H.  Heinrichs M.  Domes G.  Buchheim A.  Gündel H.  Waller C.   Oxytocin modulates neural reactivity to children's faces as a function of social salience Neuropsychopharmacology 37 2012 1799 22510724 
Xiao R.  Li X.  Li L.  Wang Y.   Can we distinguish emotions from faces? Investigation of implicit and explicit processes of peak facial expressions Front. Psychol. 2016 7 26834680 
Yoshida M.  Takayanagi Y.  Inoue K.  Kimura T.  Young L.J.  Onaka T.  Nishimori K.   Evidence that oxytocin exerts anxiolytic effects via oxytocin receptor expressed in serotonergic neurons in mice J. Neurosci. 29 2009 2259 2271 19228979 
Young L.J.  Wang Z.   The neurobiology of pair bonding Nat. Neurosci. 7 2004 1048 1054 15452576

