
==== Front
101744479Egypt J Basic Clin PharmacolEgypt J Basic Clin PharmacolEgyptian journal of basic and clinical pharmacology2090-72222090-7230ems8232510.32527/2019/101415ArticleTryptophan Metabolism: A Versatile Area Providing Multiple Targets
for Pharmacological Intervention Badawy Abdulla Abu-Bakr Formerly School of Health Sciences, Cardiff Metropolitan
University, Cardiff, Wales, UKCorresponding Author: Abdulla Abu-Bakr Badawy;
badawyabdulla@yahoo.comEditor: Mostafa Z. Badr

8 4 2019 2019 16 5 2019 9 10.32527/2019/101415This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)The essential amino acid L-tryptophan (Trp) undergoes
extensive metabolism along several pathways, resulting in production of many
biologically active metabolites which exert profound effects on physiological
processes. The disturbance in Trp metabolism and disposition in many disease
states provides a basis for exploring multiple targets for pharmaco-therapeutic
interventions. In particular, the kynurenine pathway of Trp degradation is
currently at the forefront of immunological research and immunotherapy. In this
review, I shall consider mammalian Trp metabolism in health and disease and
outline the intervention targets. It is hoped that this account will provide a
stimulus for pharmacologists and others to conduct further studies in this rich
area of biomedical research and therapeutics.

immunotherapyindoleamine 2,3-dioxygenaseinflammationkynurenine pathwaymajor depressive disorderneurological diseaseplasma free tryptophanserotonin pathwaytryptophan 2,3-dioxygenasetumoral immune escape
==== Body
1 Introduction
The essential amino acid L-tryptophan (Trp) is unique among
amino acids in the wide range of biologically active metabolites produced along its
4 degradative pathways. Trp metabolites influence body physiology at multiple levels
and it is therefore no surprise that Trp research extends across many scientific
disciplines and medical specialties (Table
1). These include: (1) Basic sciences (mammalian, insect and plant
biochemistry, behavioural science, immunology, neurochemistry, nutrition science,
pharmacology, physiology); (2) Medical specialties (cardiology, diabetes,
gastroenterology, hepatology, obstetrics & gynaecology, oncology,
ophthalmology, parasitology, rheumatology, urology, virology, veterinary medicine);
(3) Psychiatry (alcoholism, anxiety, depression, drug dependence,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, schizophrenia); (4) Neurological disease
(Alzheimer’s disease, chronic brain injury, Huntington’s disease,
stroke). For this reason, an International Society for Tryptophan Research (ISTRY)
dedicated to studying this amino acid exists and holds triennial conferences
(https://www.istry.org/).

Trp research has been actively practiced in Egypt from the 1960s on, mainly
in relation to Schistosoma infestation, by the group of Dr Gamal
Abdel-Tawab at the National Research Centre in Gizeh and the Medical Research
Institute in Alexandria (see, e.g., [1–4]). Trp research is a
fruitful area that never disappoints. The eminent Japanese scientist, Professor
Osamu Hayaishi, discoverer of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, testifies to this fact in
the title of his paper “My life with tryptophan: never a dull moment”
[5]. I have been studying Trp over the
past 48 years and have never once been disappointed by the results. I hope that the
readership of this journal will find the following account a stimulus for exploring
and enriching our knowledge of this amino acid in health and disease. In the
following text, a description of plasma Trp disposition will be followed by an
account of each of the Trp-degradative pathways. Each account will include the
general biochemical features and control of the pathway and, where appropriate, a
discussion of targets for pharmacological intervention in relation to disease
states.

Of the 4 known pathways of Trp metabolism in mammals, 3 are of minor
quantitative significance, namely the hydroxylation (serotonin and melatonin),
decarboxylation (tryptamine), and transamination (indolepyruvic acid) pathways, with
each contributing ~ 1% to overall dietary Trp degradation. Functionally,
these 3 pathways are no less important than the 4th, the oxidative (kynurenine)
pathway (KP), which accounts for ~ 95% of dietary Trp degradation [6]. Although Trp is essential for protein
synthesis, dietary Trp contributes nothing to this process in the nitrogen balance
state, wherein Trp released by protein degradation is reutilised for protein
synthesis [7]. Consequently, dietary Trp is
totally available for metabolism [7].

2 Plasma Tryptophan Disposition
2.1 General features and control
After absorption following dietary protein digestion, Trp exists in
plasma largely (90–95%) bound to albumin, with the remaining 5–10%
being free and hence immediately available for tissue uptake and metabolism.
Equilibration between free and albumin-bound Trp is, however, rapid, such that a
sustained increase in free [Trp] coupled with continued tissue uptake results in
depletion of total (free + albumin-bound) [Trp]. This is best seen in rats
treated with a single acute dose of sodium salicylate or ethanol [8]. The physiological binder of Trp is
albumin, whereas the physiological displacers of albumin-bound Trp are
non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA). Trp binding is usually expressed as the %
free Trp (100 × [free Trp]/[total Trp]. Free Trp is best isolated from
plasma or serum by ultrafiltration, rather than by equilibrium dialysis, as the
latter is less accurate. Ultrafiltration should be performed using freshly
isolated plasma or serum and never after frozen storage and subsequent thawing,
as frozen storage increases Trp binding to albumin, thereby giving an
artifactually low free [Trp] [9]. Because
of the above rapid equilibration, accurate interpretation of changes in plasma
Trp disposition necessitates determination of both free and total [Trp]. Equally
important is that these simultaneous determinations can help establish the
baseline Trp disposition status and its biological determinants [8]. Free and total Trp are now determined by
HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) or GC (gas chromatography), with
or without mass spectrometry. However, in the absence of these techniques, Trp
can be measured fluorimetrically by the method of Denckla and Dewey [10], as modified by Bloxam and Warren
[11] to avoid errors in the
former.

Table 2 lists the number of
conditions influencing plasma Trp disposition and the mechanisms involved [12]. Important points to note from this
Table are the following. Induction of liver Trp 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) or
extrahepatic indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) should decrease both free and
total [Trp] by similar proportions without altering the % free Trp. Similarly,
TDO inhibition should increase both free and total [Trp] without altering the %
free Trp. Other changes in free [Trp] and the % free Trp occur in parallel when
Trp binding is altered. Binding is increased when NEFA are decreased by insulin,
nicotinic acid or other antilipolytic agents, but is decreased by displacement
from albumin-binding sites by NEFA and agents acting via NEFA, by direct
displacement, e.g. by salicylate, or if [albumin] is decreased, e.g. in
pregnancy and liver and kidney diseases.

Plasma free Trp can also be influenced by diet. Dietary proteins and
lipids will increase it, whereas dietary carbohydrates will decrease it [8], with proteins providing Trp, lipids
providing NEFA and inhibiting liver TDO, and carbohydrates acting via insulin.
Thus, assessing the plasma free Trp status should take into consideration the
potential effects of food and drugs. To avoid the influence of recent food
intake, free and total [Trp] should be determined in plasma or serum of
overnight fasting subjects.

2.2 Pharmacological targeting
As far as I could ascertain, pharmacological intervention to alter plasma
Trp availability has been limited to the use of Trp mainly in the treatment of
depression in relation to the serotonin deficiency in this condition. This will
be discussed further under 3 (the
hydroxylation or serotonin pathway). Targeting Trp availability to
tumors has recently been proposed [13] to
overcome tumoral immune escape. Here, decreasing plasma free [Trp] using
antilipolytic agents, albumin infusions or both has been suggested. This will be
discussed further under 6 (the
oxidative or kynurenine pathway).

3 The Hydroxylation or Serotonin Pathway
3.1 General features and control
Serotonin synthesis is a 2-step process (Figure 1). First, Trp is hydroxylated to 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP)
by Trp hydroxylase (TPH). This is then followed by decarboxylation of 5-HTP to
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) or serotonin. The serotonin pathway exists in brain,
gastrointestinal tract and pineal gland. 5-HT is further converted to melatonin
in the pineal gland and the periphery. TPH exists in 2 isoforms: TPH1 in the
periphery and TPH2 in the central nervous system (CNS). 5-HT is metabolised
mainly by oxidation to 5-hydroxindoleacetaldehyde by monoamine oxidase (MAO) and
this is followed by further oxidation to 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA),
the main urinary serotonin metabolite, by the action of aldehyde dehydrogenase
(ALDH). Not shown in Figure 1 is the
reduction of 5-hydroxindoleacetaldehyde to 5-hydroxytryptophol by the action of
aldehyde reductase. This is a minor pathway of serotonin metabolism, which can
be enhanced by alcohol consumption and metabolism providing adequate amounts of
the NAD(P)H cofactor for the reductase. 5-Hydroxytryptophol is thought to
promote sleep. In the pineal gland and elsewhere, 5-HT is converted to melatonin
in a 2-step process: N-acetylation to N-acetyl serotonin followed by
o methylation of the 5 hydroxy group of the latter to
melatonin.

In rat and other experimental animal brains, TPH is the rate-limiting
enzyme in cerebral 5-HT synthesis. However, whereas TPH activity can be
influenced by factors such as phosphorylation of the enzyme and level of the
cerebral cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), brain [Trp] is the major
determinant of TPH activity, because the enzyme exists unsaturated (≤
50%) with its Trp substrate [14], i.e.
the physiological [Trp] is lower than the Km of TPH.
Thus, minor fluctuations in [Trp] in brain or its availability in the
circulation can have a significant impact on cerebral 5-HT synthesis.

Excess Trp can, however, decrease serotonin synthesis by substrate
inhibition of TPH. Such inhibition has been demonstrated in
vitro when TPH activity was determined by measuring brain [5-HTP]
after ALAAD inhibition but in the presence of the natural BH4
cofactor and not its analogue dimethyl tetrahydrobiopterin [15], and in vivo after
administration of large doses of Trp [16]. Substrate (Tyr) inhibition of brain tyrosine hydroxylase activity
has also been similarly demonstrated both in vitro [17] and in vivo after
administration of various doses of Tyr [18]. Substrate inhibition of TPH in vivo is also
suggested by the finding that, whereas rat brain [Trp] continues to rise with
increasing dosage, the increases in brain [5-HT] and [5-HIAA] cease to rise and
begin to decrease with doses of Trp of 50 mg/kg and above [19]. In general, the increase in brain [5-HT] after Trp
loading rarely reaches, and certainly does not exceed, twofold.

Whereas assessing cerebral 5-HT synthesis in rats can be achieved by
direct measurement of brain levels of Trp, 5-HT and the major serotonin
metabolite 5-HIAA and by estimating the rate of hydroxylation of Trp to 5-HTP
in vivo by measuring brain levels of the latter following
inhibition of aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (ALAAD)
activity in brain, e.g. by compound NSD-1015, these techniques cannot be used in
humans for obvious reasons. As brain [Trp] is the major determinant of TPH
activity and hence brain 5-HT synthesis, assessing the likely changes in brain
[Trp] in humans is currently performed by measuring the ratio of plasma [Trp] to
the sum of 5 competing amino acids [CAA] which share with Trp the same cerebral
uptake mechanism. The change in this ratio is considered a reasonable reflection
of the likely changes in brain [Trp] and hence 5-HT synthesis. The 5 competing
amino acids are the 3 branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) Val, Leu and Ile, and
the 2 aromatic amino acids Phe and Tyr. Both the free and total [Trp]/[CAA]
ratios should be determined. Utilising this principle, brain 5-HT can be acutely
decreased or increased by the techniques of acute Trp depletion (ATD) or loading
(ATL) respectively [20, 21], which are widely used to manipulate
serotonin levels in diagnostic and research studies in psychiatric and other
conditions associated with serotonin dysfunction. In the original method of
Young et al [20], the
high content of BCAA led to decreased specificity towards serotonin. This has
been remedied by lowering the BCAA content by 40% [21]. Although the second enzyme of 5-HT synthesis, ALAAD,
is thought not to be rate-limiting in rat brain, it may be limiting in human
brain, where its activity is low [22].
ALAAD is a pyridoxal 5’-phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzyme and it is
therefore possible that subjects with vitamin B6 deficiency could be
at risk of becoming serotonin-deficient. B6 deficiency could be
nutritional or drug-induced, e.g. by hydrazine compounds (e.g. benserazide and
carbidopa) and oestrogens.

Melatonin is synthesized in the pineal gland, retina and various other
brain structures, the gastrointestinal tract and many other peripheral tissues
[23] and exerts a wide range of
effects, including regulation of the sleep-wakefulness cycle, modulation of
immune function, the endocrine system and reproduction, free radical scavenging
(antioxidant effect) and regulation of the mental state and behaviour [24]. Pineal gland calcification results in
decreased pineal melatonin production and is associated with neurological
diseases and other pathologies [25].
Melatonin is synthesized from Trp via serotonin. Pineal synthesis occurs at
night. Of the 2 steps of synthesis from serotonin, the first, catalysed by AANAT
(arylalkylamine N-acetyl transferase) is rate-limiting. In the chicken pineal
and retina, the mRNAs encoding AANAT, HIOMT and TPH are expressed in a day/night
rhythm, with the rhythm in the pineal persisting under conditions of constant
darkness [26]. Trp loading increases
melatonin synthesis in the rat pineal by up to 100% [27]. As this is also the maximum elevation of brain
serotonin levels after Trp loading (because of substrate inhibition of TPH by
excess Trp, see above) and as serotonin is the precursor of melatonin, it may be
concluded that synthesis of the latter from Trp is subject to the same TPH
control mechanisms applicable to serotonin synthesis.

3.2 Pharmacological targeting
The serotonin pathway has been a target for pharmacotherapy of
conditions associated with serotonin deficiency or dysfunction (Table 3). The monoamine hypothesis of
affective disorders that postulates a deficiency in one or more monoamines
(serotonin, dopamine and/or noradrenaline) formed the basis of the first
pharmacotherapy of these conditions, with major depressive disorder (MDD) having
received the greatest attention. To ensure adequate levels of cerebral
monoamines, preventing their degradation was the first adopted approach in
pharmacotherapy. This was achieved by using and developing monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOI) and inhibitors of monoamine reuptake at the synaptic cleft,
the tricyclic antidepressants. There is a wide array of antidepressant drugs of
different chemical structures and pharmacological profiles in current use. Those
related to serotonin function include selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, serotonin antagonists,
MAOIs and some tricyclic antidepressants.

MAO-A is the isoform of MAO that preferentially deaminates serotonin,
adrenaline, noradrenaline and melatonin. Different trace amines are deaminated
by MAO-A and MAO-B. Dopamine is equally deaminated by both isoforms. In addition
to their use in depression, MAOIs are also used in Parkinson’s disease,
panic disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder. A recent development in MAO
targeting is in prostate cancer, where the A form is highly expressed [28, 29]. Targeting MAOs with multipotent ligands has been suggested as a
potential strategy in the search for new drugs to treat neurodegenerative
diseases [30].

The B form of MAO has been implicated in the neurotoxicity and
Parkinson’s disease-like symptoms in subjects receiving MPTP
(1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine): a by-product in the synthesis of
a mepyridine analogue first used as a substitute for heroin [31, 32]. MPTP itself is not neurotoxic, but is converted into toxic
pyridinium metabolites by MAO-B.

Inhibition of MAO-B by deprenyl prevents the toxicity, and the abundance
of MAO-B in dopaminergic neurons explains the high susceptibility of these
neurons to MPTP toxicity (see [31] and
references cited therein).

Targeting ALAAD is currently the mechanism of therapy of
Parkinson’s disease, which involves dopamine deficiency. To ensure that
adequate amounts of the dopamine precursor L-Dopa
(3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) reach the brain, it is administered jointly with
inhibitors of peripheral ALAAD (such as carbidopa and benserazide) to prevent
its decarboxylation to dopamine in the periphery. Other ALAAD inhibitors include
3-hydroxybenzylhydrazine and L-α-methyldopa.

Targeting TPH2 has more recently been proposed to enhance brain
serotonin synthesis in major depressive disorder [33]. The authors proposed approaches including
transcriptional activation of the TPH2 gene, gene therapy, post-translational
modifications (e.g. by phosphorylation), and use of 5-HT precursors. The first
two approaches may be effective only in the long-term and are not without risk,
whereas the third can only have a moderate effect (see [34] and references cited therein). The key to boosting
central serotonin synthesis in the short term is in the TPH2 kinetic properties
and especially Trp availability [34]. One
of the early therapies of depression was oral Trp administration. Results of
clinical trials with Trp have been equivocal and it appears that, at best, Trp
may exert a moderate antidepressant effect in mildly depressed patients (for
references, see [34]). The reason for the
poor efficacy of Trp is almost certain to be its increased hepatic degradation
by TDO leading to decreased availability to the brain. This decreased
availability is suggested by the decrease in plasma [Trp] and in the [Trp]/[CAA]
ratio in depressed patients (for references, see [34]). As will be discussed below, an inverse relationship
exists between liver TDO and brain [Trp] and 5-HT synthesis. Liver TDO is likely
to be induced in MDD, at least in ~50% of patients, in whom cortisol is
elevated. TDO can also be activated in MDD by other mechanisms, e.g. raised
peripheral catecholamines enhancing lipolysis, thereby increasing free Trp entry
into liver and activating TDO by a substrate-type mechanism [34] (see below). For Trp to be an effective
antidepressant, it has been suggested that it is administered together with a
liver TDO inhibitor [35, 36]. Subsequent studies showed that a large
number of antidepressant drugs of various chemical structures and
pharmacological profiles also inhibit TDO (Trp pyrrolase) activity (see [34] and references cited therein). TDO
inhibition will be further discussed in 6 (the oxidative or kynurenine pathway). In 8 out of 13
clinical trials, Trp was shown to potentiate the antidepressant effects of MAOIs
and tricyclic antidepressants (for references, see [37]). Many important features of the role of Trp in MDD are
discussed in [34], including comparative
TDO-inhibitory potencies of antidepressants, the effects of mood stabilisers,
augmenters and adjunctive therapies (Li+, carbamazepine, allopurinol,
nicotinamide, oestrogens, progesterone, salicylate, the β-adrenoceptor
blocker pindolol and T3) on Trp metabolism, the optimal Trp dosages,
the delayed therapeutic response to antidepressants and the effects of the
latter on circulating cortisol. The role of cytokines and inflammation in
depression is also briefly discussed, though, in the author’s opinion,
inflammation does not play a role in the impaired availability of circulating
Trp to the brain for serotonin synthesis in MDD, even if it contributes
significantly to the psychopathology of depression. This will be discussed
further in 6 below.

The serotonin pathway in the periphery plays an important role in
certain conditions, e.g., osteoporosis, irritable bowel syndrome, carcinoid
syndrome, obesity, ulcerative colitis and pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Current and potential inhibitors of TPH1 have been reviewed [38].

The important physiological roles of melatonin render it an attractive
target for pharmacotherapy of certain conditions in addition to sleep
disturbances and jet lag. Such conditions include autism spectrum disorder,
where a defective melatonin synthesis due to impaired AANAT and HIOMT in pineal,
gut and platelets involves post-translational and post-transcriptional
mechanisms [39], cancer, where melatonin
can influence many of its hallmarks [40]
and protection of mitochondria [41].
AANAT is the enzyme involved in the diurnal rhythm of pineal melatonin synthesis
and N-bromoacetyltryptamine has recently been shown to be a potent inhibitor of
this enzyme and suggested for use to dissect the role of melatonin in the
circadian rhythm and a potential lead compound for therapeutic use in mood and
sleep disorders [42].

4 The Decarboxylation or Tryptamine Pathway
4.1 General features and control
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (ALAAD)
decarboxylates amino acids to their respective amines and intermediates of
monoamine biosynthetic pathways to their respective monoamines, e.g. Trp to
tryptamine, Tyr to tyramine, Phe to phenylethylamine, 5-HTP to 5-HT and
L-Dopa to dopamine. The enzyme uses pyridoxal
5’-phosphate (PLP) as cofactor and releases CO2 (Figure 2). It is therefore controlled by
availability of the cofactor and of the Trp substrate. Decarboxylation of Trp to
tryptamine occurs in the periphery and the CNS, where tryptamine has a very
rapid turnover rate and is thought to fulfil the criteria for a neurotransmitter
and also a modulator of monoamine function [43], thereby implicating it in various psychiatric conditions,
including hepatic encephalopathy [43,
44]. Patients with hepatic coma
exhibit a greater tryptamine turnover, as assessed by levels of the metabolite
indoleacetic acid (IAA) [45]. Urinary
excretion of IAA is elevated in some conditions, including diabetes,
neuromuscular disorders, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and idiopathic sprue, but
not in many others [46]. Brain
[tryptamine] in humans and several animal species is generally, however, in the
sub-micromolar range, but can be dramatically increased by MAO inhibition (see
[43] and references cited therein).
The decarboxylation pathway contributes little to overall Trp degradation [47].

The pathway also exists in the gastrointestinal tract. Thus, it has been
known for some time that part of brain tryptamine is of intestinal bacterial
origin [48]. More recently, Williams
et al [49]
demonstrated at least one of two bacteria encoding Trp decarboxylase in guts of
10% of the human population: the common gut firmicute Clostridium
sporogenes and Ruminococcus gnavus.

4.2 Pharmacological targeting
Halogenated tryptamine derivatives have been suggested as potential
radiopharmaceuticals for monitoring abnormal brain states occurring in
Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases and schizophrenia [50, 51] and tryptamine Schiff bases were proposed as antimicrobial
agents [52] (Table 3). Tryptamine has also been targeted in plant
biochemistry and biology, both as the precursor of the plant auxin IAA and as a
proto-alkaloid in tobacco plant biology and of hallucinogenic derivatives.

5 The Transamination or Indolepyruvic Acid Pathway
5.1 General features and control
Trp can be transaminated to indol-3-ylpyruvic acid (IPA) via an unstable
intermediate (Figure 3) by
aminotransferases. In crude homogenates of rat liver, 60% of Trp
aminotransferase activity can be attributed to tyrosine aminotransferase [53]. Several more Trp-specific
aminotransferases have now been identified. These include the
mammalian/bacterial Trp-2-oxoglutarate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.27), which can
also act on 5-HTP and to a lesser extent on phenyl amino acids, and the
bacterial Trp-phenylpyruvate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.28) and plant
Trp-pyruvate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.99) [54]. The IPA formed can be either reduced to indol-3-yllactic acid
by indole lactate dehydrogenase, or decarboxylated by indole pyruvate
decarboxylase to indol-3-ylacetaldehyde. The latter is subsequently oxidised by
aldehyde dehydrogenase to indol-3-ylacetic acid.

IPA has been shown in more recent years to be converted to kynurenic
acid (KA), an important kynurenine metabolite (see below). As shown in Figure 3, IPA is capable of tautomerization
and when the keto form initially produced tautomerizes to the enol form, the
latter is converted into an unstable Kynuric acid intermediate under the
influence of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which spontaneously cyclises to KA
[55]. Two potential mechanisms of KA
formation from IPA are: non-enzymic production by ROS and production by
transamination of kynurenine produced from Trp through IPA back transamination
(see [55] and references cited
therein).

It has been known for some time that IPA [56] is remarkably efficient in promoting the growth of rats
deprived of Trp, thus suggesting that IPA can be back-transaminated to Trp. This
could occur by the reversible transamination reaction of the mammalian enzyme
[55], or of the common gut firmicute
Clostridium sporogenes [57]. Synthesis of Trp from IPA was suggested in a study of a healthy
woman who restored her nitrogen balance by intake of IPA while being maintained
on a synthetic Trp-free diet [58].

As is the case with the decarboxylation pathway, the transamination or
IPA pathway can be limited by availability of the PLP cofactor as determined by
nutritional, pharmacological and physiological modulators.

5.2 Pharmacological targeting
IPA possesses a number of pharmacological properties, including
sedation, analgesia, sleep-promotion and antioxidant and anticonvulsant actions
[59, 60], which render it a target for pharmacological interventions
(Table 3). A patent on
“3-Indolepyruvic acid derivatives and pharmaceutical use thereof”
for the treatment of disturbances of the central nervous system caused by
elevation of brain superoxide anions in conditions such as epilepsy, cerebral
ischemia, ictus and Alzheimer’s disease exists [61] which is hypothesized to involve increased production
of KA from IPA. More recently, IPA has been shown to be formed and excreted in
large amounts by the parasite Trypanasoma brucei, which causes
African trypanosomiasis or sleeping sickness in humans and nagana in domestic
animals [62]. IPA was shown to prevent
the lipopolysaccharide (LPS or endotoxin)-induced glycolytic shift in
macrophages resulting from increased hydroxylation and degradation of the
transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor-1α
(HIF-1α). The reduction in
HIF-1α levels by IPA following LPS or trypanosome
activation results in a decrease in production of the proinflammatory cytokine
IL-1β, thus permitting immune escape by the parasite (see the immune
discussion in 6 below).

6 The Oxidative or Kynurenine Pathway
The KP exists mainly in the liver, where it accounts for ~ 90% of
overall Trp degradation. The KP also exists in extrahepatic tissues and contributes
little (< 2%) to Trp degradation under normal physiological conditions.
However, after immune activation, the extrahepatic KP assumes a greater quantitative
significance (see below). Whereas early studies of the KP were related mainly to its
role in nutrition (exerted by the pellagra-preventing factor nicotinic acid or
nicotinamide: the 2 forms of “vitamin” B3) and assessment
of the functional capacity of the pathway by analysis of urinary metabolites
following acute Trp loading in healthy subjects and those with various diseases,
emphasis has shifted to assessment of the role of KP metabolites as modulators of
immune function. Because of its special importance in health and disease, a detailed
account is given below of the biochemistry and functions of the KP and the wide
range of pharmacological targeting it attracts.

6.1 General features
Detailed accounts of the KP have been published [6, 7]. As shown in
Figure 4, Trp is first oxidized to
N’-formylkynurenine by the catalytic actions of liver Trp
2,3-dioxygenase (TDO, formerly Trp pyrrolase; EC 1.13.11.11) and the
extrahepatic indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO: EC 1.13.11.17). The above product
is rapidly hydrolysed by the abundant N’-formylkynurenine formamidase to
kynurenine (Kyn). Kyn is then metabolised mainly by oxidation, first to
3-hydroxykynurenine (3-HK) by Kyn monooxygenase (KMO or Kyn hydroxylase),
followed by hydrolysis of 3-HK to 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid (3-HAA) by
kynureninase. This latter enzyme can also convert Kyn to anthranilic acid (AA).
For simplicity, the kynureninase reactions will be designated as kynureninase A
(Kyn → AA) and B (3-HK → 3-HAA). 3-HAA is then oxidized by 3-HAA
3,4-dioxygenase (3-HAAO) to the unstable intermediate 2-amino-3-carboxymuconic
acid-6-semialdehyde (ACMS; also known as Acroleyl aminofumarate), which occupies
a central position at the 2 arms of the KP. ACMS undergoes non-enzymic
cyclization to quinolinic acid (QA) or decarboxylation by ACMS Decarboxylase
(ACMSD: also known as picolinate carboxylase) to 2-aminomuconic
acid-6-semialdehyde (AMS). The latter can also undergo non-enzymic cyclization
to picolinic acid (PA) or oxidation by AMS dehydrogenase to 2-aminomuconic acid,
with eventual conversion to acetyl CoA. The KP favours the production of QA
rather than PA. Only when AMSD is saturated with its substrate can PA be formed
in larger amounts. The KP includes 2 aminotransferases, which transaminate Kyn
to KA (KAT A) and 3-HK to xanthurenic acid (XA) (KAT B). Transamination is,
however, a minor pathway, in view of the high Km of
the 2 enzymes for their substrates (Kyn and 3-HK), compared with the lower
Kms of KMO and kynureninase for these 2
substrates respectively (see [6] for
details). Only when the substrate concentration is increased [by Trp or Kyn
loading or KMO inhibition (see 6.4.6.
below)] can significant amounts of products be formed. As will be described
below, 4 isoforms of KAT are known (KAT I, II, III and IV).

The rest of the KP involves the synthesis of NAD+ from QA
(the de novo pathway), or from nicotinic acid and nicotinamide
(the salvage pathway) through the series of reactions outlined in Figure 5, which also shows the
interconversion of NAD+ and NADP+ and the methylation of
nicotinamide and subsequent oxidation to the major urinary metabolites the
N1 methyl 2- and 4-pyridone carboxamides. Details of all KP
enzymes, including substrates, products, cofactors and major tissue sources can
be seen in [6]. The liver is the only
tissue that contains the complete set of enzymes of the KP leading to niacin and
NAD+ synthesis. Thus, in extrahepatic tissues, the presence or
absence of certain enzymes will determine the KP metabolite patterns in these
tissues. NAD+ synthesis is more effective from Trp (via QA), than
from nicotinamide or nicotinic acid [63–65]. From a
nutritional viewpoint, a 1 mg of niacin is formed from 60 mg of Trp [66, 67].

6.2 Control of the pathway
The KP is controlled primarily by the first enzyme(s), namely TDO in
liver and IDO elsewhere. Although these are the 2 rate-limiting enzymes of the
KP, it is important to emphasize that the flux of Trp down the pathway is
determined primarily by plasma free Trp (see [6] and references cited therein). More recent evidence (see below)
suggests that some Kyn metabolites can also play a regulatory role within the
pathway.

6.2.1 Roles of TDO and IDO in tryptophan oxidation
As stated above, liver TDO controls Trp oxidation through the KP
under normal physiological conditions, whereas the extrahepatic IDO plays a
negligible role. Evidence for this difference is provided by the
observations that deletion of the TDO2 gene increases plasma [Trp] by
9.3-12.7-fold [68, 69] and that, although plasma [Trp] was
not measured in a study involving IDO1 deletion [70], brain [Trp] was not altered after IDO1 or IDO2
gene deletion in contrast to a 10.6-fold increase in brain [Trp] after TDO2
gene deletion [71]. However, as will
be discussed below, under conditions of immune activation, IDO assumes a
greater role in Trp oxidation, with important biological consequences. Under
certain conditions, the KP may also be limited by activity of certain
enzymes, notably kynureninase and ACMSD or picolinate carboxylase.

6.2.2 Regulation of TDO
Liver TDO in humans, rats and certain, but not all other, animal
species exists in two forms: the active haem-containing holoenzyme and the
inactive haem-free apoenzyme, in roughly equal proportions. Other
differences between these two groups of animal species exist, which
necessitate careful choice of the most suitable animal model to study in
relation to human Trp metabolism. This will be discussed below.

In rats, TDO is regulated by 4 mechanisms: (1) glucocorticoid
induction of de novo synthesis of the enzyme; (2) substrate
(Trp) activation of the enzyme by promoting the conjugation of the haem-free
apoenzyme with its haem cofactor and by stabilisation of the pre-existing
apoenzyme in the presence of the normal rate of its synthesis; (3) cofactor
activation by haem; (4) feedback inhibition by NAD(P)H. TDO was one of the
first enzymes in which these mechanisms were identified, which established
the concept of enzyme regulation in the early 1960s, and this was pioneered
in the USA by the groups of W Eugene Knox, Olga Greengard, Philip Feigelson
and Henry C Pitot. Details of these mechanisms are discussed in [6] and it is noteworthy that: (1) some
other hormones influence TDO synthesis; (2) the Trp activation of TDO may
involve induction of haem biosynthesis; (3) the haem cofactor may mediate
glucocorticoid induction of TDO mRNA transcription and translation; and (4)
regulate the TDO gene post-translationally through enhanced phosphorylation
of the α subunit of the eukaryotic initiation factor
eIF2α (for references, see [6]). Regarding the feedback allosteric
inhibition of TDO [72], the enzyme
activity is inhibited by agents which increase the hepatic concentrations of
NAD(P)H, such as glucose and nicotinamide [73] and chronic ethanol intake [74].

6.2.3 Regulation of IDO
By contrast with liver TDO, the extrahepatic IDO is not inducible by
glucocorticoids nor activated by haem, as it exists only in the
haem-containing active holoenzyme [75, 76]. Also, IDO is less
sensitive to activation by Trp, compared with TDO. Thus, whereas the latter
in rat liver is activated severalfold by Trp, IDO in the rat intestine (the
richest source) is activated by only 50% by a large Trp dose [76]. This modest response may involve
substrate inhibition of IDO, which occurs with the mouse epididymal enzyme
at [Trp] above 50 μM [77] by a mechanism investigated in the human enzyme
involving a reversed sequence of binding of Trp and O2 [78]. At low [Trp], Trp is bound to the
enzyme first followed by O2, whereas at high [Trp], this order is
reversed, with the haem reduction potential playing an important role [78].

The principal effector of IDO is
interferon-γ (IFN-γ)
[79].
Interferon-α is a less efficient inducer [80]. Other cytokines and mediators
(both pro- and anti-inflammatory) exert various effects on IDO (for details
and references, see [34]). Thus, the
IDO status can be assumed to be determined by the balance between pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines. Potentiation of the
IFN-γ induction of IDO by the synthetic
glucocorticoid dexamethasone, which is ineffective by itself [80] suggests that glucocorticoids exert
a permissive effect on IDO induction, which may be important in tumoral
immune escape (see below).

As an inhibitor of human IDO [81], nitric oxide (NO) may act as modulator of the immune
function of the enzyme. Activity of the recombinant human IDO is reversibly
inhibited by NO by binding to haem, with the inactivated enzyme complex
being the Fe2+-NO-Trp adduct [82].

6.2.4 Species differences in tryptophan metabolism and the choice of animal
models
Because of wide species differences in Trp metabolism and enzymes of
the KP, it is important that the appropriate animal model of Trp-related
function and in relation to human disease is carefully selected. Regarding
Trp metabolism, species can be broadly divided into 2 groups: one possessing
both forms of TDO (holoenzyme and apoenzyme) and the glucocorticoid
induction mechanism, and the other lacking the free apoenzyme and
glucocorticoid induction. The former group includes man, rat, mouse,
chicken, turkey and pig, whereas the second group includes cat
(Felis catus), frog, the Mongolian gerbil, the golden
(Syrian) hamster, guinea pig, ox, rabbit and sheep [83]. Because of the absence of the glucocorticoid
induction mechanism, which facilitates increased TDO synthesis to handle a
sudden increase in [Trp], the latter group of species are sensitive to the
toxicity of excess Trp [83]. There
are also major species differences in enzymes of the KP (other than TDO) in
liver and elsewhere among the above 2 groups. A most notable difference
between cat and rat is the much greater activity of ACMSD, with a cat:rat
ratio of 32: 1 in liver and 4: 1 in kidney [84]. This greater ACMSD activity renders the cat vulnerable to
niacin and NAD+ deficiency, with the conversion of 3-HK to niacin
ribonucleotides being only 11% of that in the rat [84]. More recently, differences in many KP enzymes in
various tissues have been reported between rats, mice, rabbits, gerbils and
guinea pigs [85, 86]. The distinction between these 2
groups of species based on differences in TDO and other KP enzymes does not
apply to IDO [85, 86].

It may therefore be concluded that the above TDO-deficient species
are unsuitable as animal models of human Trp-related diseases, though they
would be valid models in studies addressing issues related to their specific
KP characteristics. Rats and mice are the most common experimental animal
models. However, because of significant mouse strain differences in Trp
metabolism [12], I recommend the
Wistar rat as the most suitable animal model for Trp-related studies.

6.3 Functions of the pathway
The KP performs a variety of important physiological functions,
disturbances of which result in negative health consequences. The following are
brief accounts of these functions, (Table
4), which have been discussed in more detail elsewhere [6].

6.3.1 Detoxification of excess tryptophan
As stated above, animal species lacking the free TDO apoenzyme and
its glucocorticoid induction mechanism are sensitive to the toxicity of
excess Trp [83]. These species are
unable to synthesise the TDO apoenzyme necessary to meet the increased need
to process the excess Trp to “harmless” kynurenine
metabolites. As a result, Trp metabolism is diverted towards production of
excessive amounts of indoles [87].
When rats are deprived of the glucocorticoid induction mechanism by
adrenalectomy, they become also sensitive to the toxic actions of excess Trp
but receive protection upon cortisol administration [88]. This detoxicating function of the KP is restricted
to liver TDO and so does not involve differences in IDO, because, although
some have a higher IDO activity, species lacking the TDO apoenzyme are still
sensitive to Trp toxicity. The ability of [Trp] above 50
μM to inhibit IDO activity [77] may make a possible additional, if
minor, contribution to the poor ability of these species to process the
excess Trp. It is notable that, with the exception of the cat, these species
are herbivorous. They, however, attempt to deal with Trp differently from
species which tolerate Trp, by two mechanisms. First, their TDO shows a
rapid response to activation by Trp and at lower [Trp], compared with e.g.
rats (see [89] and references cited
therein). Second, they metabolise Trp to acetyl CoA more efficiently than
the other species. Thus, as described above, the cat possesses a greatly
elevated ACMSD activity [84] and a
study in isolated hepatocytes [90]
showed that, whereas the rate of Trp oxidation and QA formation are lower
than in rats, guinea pigs, gerbils and sheep metabolize a much larger part
of Trp through the citric acid cycle.

6.3.2 Control of plasma tryptophan availability
As stated in 6.2.1. above, TDO
controls plasma Trp availability under normal physiological conditions,
whereas IDO plays a more active role during immune activation. Earlier work
has demonstrated the impact of liver TDO on plasma Trp availability. For
example, an inverse relationship exists between liver TDO activity and brain
[Trp] and 5-HT synthesis [91]. The
potential glucocorticoid induction of TDO by the elevated cortisol may
explain the serotonin deficiency in major depressive disorder (MDD) [34]. In this latter study, it was shown
that TDO inhibition by chronic administration to rats of drugs of dependence
increases brain [Trp] and enhances 5-HT synthesis, whereas TDO induction by
corticosterone during subsequent drug withdrawal exerts the opposite
effects. The dramatic increase in plasma [Trp] induced by deletion of the
mouse TDO gene results in an equally dramatic increase in circulating Trp
availability to the brain (expressed as the [Trp]/[competing amino acids]
ratio) and consequently in brain Trp, 5-HT and 5-HIAA [68]. The control of Trp availability to the brain by
TDO has also been suggested [68] as a
modulator of anxiety through changes in brain 5-HT. TDO gene deletion also
increases Trp availability for Trp decarboxylation and transamination [68] and it is of interest that the Trp
transamination product indolepyruvic acid (IPA) possesses anxiolytic
properties [60].

Although it plays a minor role in the control of plasma Trp
availability under normal conditions, the extrahepatic IDO can influence KP
activity even in the absence of TDO, as suggested by the finding [68] that plasma [Kyn] and [KA] are
maintained at wild-type levels in TDO Knock-out (KO) mice. In the absence of
preformed niacin, synthesis of Kyn and its metabolites KA, XA and 3-HAA is
increased, whereas that of QA is decreased, in these mice [69]. The latter authors suggested that
Kyn formed by IDO extrahepatically can be utilized by the liver to form
adequate amounts of nicotinamide and NAD+ nucleotides to maintain
growth. Also, it is very likely that the hepatic KP can contribute to
extrahepatic Kyn metabolite formation through the availability of the Kyn
precursor. In some situations, this is likely to be quantitatively more
important than the modest contribution of IDO itself. The role of IDO in
control of plasma Trp availability takes centre stage when the immune system
is activated. IDO induction by IFN-γ and agents
acting through it leads to depletion of [Trp] and increased Kyn formation in
cultures of monocytes [80] and serum
[92].

6.3.3 Control of hepatic haem biosynthesis
Mammalian hepatic haem biosynthesis is controlled by the
rate-limiting enzyme 5-aminolaevulinate synthase (5-ALAS) and is achieved by
a negative feedback mechanism exerted by a small pool of haem whose
concentration in the (rat) hepatic cytosol is ~
10−7 M (see [93] and references cited therein). Haem biosynthesis can therefore
be enhanced by a decrease in this regulatory-haem pool, e.g. by destruction
of haem to green and other pigments by chemical porphyrogens, such as
2-allyl-2-isopropylacetamide and 3,5-diethoxycarbonyl,
1,4-dihydrocollidine), inhibition of ferrochelatase by griseofulvin, or
induction of haem oxygenase by metal cations. Under any of these conditions,
the decrease in the regulatory-haem pool removes the negative feedback
control. Utilisation of this pool by haemoproteins is another mechanism by
which haem biosynthesis can be enhanced. The only haemoprotein that utilises
this pool is liver TDO [93]. This
utilisation can be estimated from the increase in the TDO holoenzyme
activity or in the haem saturation of the enzyme in rat liver. The latter is
usually expressed as the percentage haem saturation (100 X holoenzyme
activity/total enzyme activity) or the haem-saturation ratio (holoenzyme
activity/apoenzyme activity) [93].
Under a variety of experimental conditions involving changes in haem
synthesis and degradation, the above haem saturation of TDO is altered in
the appropriate direction and is always inversely related to 5-ALAS activity
[93–97]. The rat (and possibly also human) liver TDO thus
serves as a sensitive marker of changes in the regulatory-haem pool: a
property that forms the basis of a screening test for exacerbation of
porphyria by drugs and other chemicals [98].

6.3.4 Modulation of immune function by kynurenine metabolites
The first indication that Trp metabolites along the KP may influence
immune function was the discovery in the 1970s-80s of the enzyme indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and its induction by
interferon-γ (IFN-γ)
[99–101]. Initially, it was thought that the
antibacterial, antiparasitic and antiviral effects of this major cytokine
involve deprivation of these pathogens of an essential nutrient, Trp, by
stimulating its breakdown through IDO induction [102, 103]. The
Trp depletion theory in infectious diseases was thus born and its
application was extended to explain the immune tolerance of pregnancy [104]. However, Trp is not depleted in
pregnancy, but is increased to meet the increased demand for protein
synthesis by mother and foetus. The above decrease refers to the plasma
total [Trp], which has been shown in many studies to occur in late
pregnancy. However, in contrast, maternal free [Trp] is increased throughout
pregnancy by a combination of liver TDO inhibition, increased [NEFA] and
decreased [albumin, [105]]. This
illustrates the need to measure both free and total [Trp] for accurate
interpretation of changes in Trp metabolism and disposition. While there may
be a case for Trp depletion in infection, this cannot be a universal or a
sole mechanism for defence against pathogens. For example, most bacteria
will not suffer from Trp depletion, because they can synthesize Trp. Several
other equally compelling arguments against the Trp depletion concept can be
seen in the excellent review by Moffett and Namboodiri [106]. These latter authors proposed
“Trp utilisation” as a more appropriate concept in infectious
diseases. A Trp utilisation concept in pregnancy was also proposed [107, 108]. The Trp depletion concept in pregnancy and infection has
been suggested [109] to be no longer
tenable, because the depletion of Trp is accompanied by increased formation
of kynurenine metabolites, which exert profound effects on the immune
system. The Trp utilisation concept was thus born and the following account
summarises the immunomodulatory properties of kynurenine metabolites.

QA was the first Kyn metabolite to be shown to possess
antiinflammatory effects in rats [110]. Subsequent studies showed that other Kyn metabolites (Kyn,
3-HK and 3-HAA) suppress T cell responses in vitro in an
additive manner and by an apoptotic mechanism [111]. Findings by Fallarino et al
[112] confirmed the apoptotic
mechanism and showed that both QA and 3-HAA induced apoptosis in T-helper
type 1 (Th1), but not in Th2 cells. At the smallest concentration of Kyn
metabolites tested (10 μM), only 3-HAA and QA
induced apoptosis in thymocytes, whereas 3-HK, Kyn and AA were ineffective.
With macrophages, a 10-fold higher concentration of 3-HAA was needed to
induce apoptosis. Other details are discussed in [106] and further information on the immunomodulatory
effects of Kyn metabolites continues to be generated by many subsequent and
current investigations. As will be discussed below, tumors take advantage of
the immunosuppressive effects of Kyn metabolites to undermine effector T
cell function and thereby escape an immune response.

The immunomodulatory effects of Kyn metabolites have, however, been
demonstrated in vitro at concentrations (10
μM and above) that are much higher than their
circulating plasma levels, which are in the sub-micromolar range (see [113] and references cited therein).
Metabolites could, however, reach very high levels in cellular
microenvironments. Attempts to establish such levels have been successful
only with QA using immunohistochemistry [106, 114]. This has been
possible by the successful production of specific antibodies to QA by virtue
of its chemical structure, in particular the absence of an amino group. With
other Kyn metabolites, except for KA and PA, the presence of both an amino
and a carboxyl group allowed orientation in several directions when being
coupled to a protein (see [113]),
thus leading to non-specific epitopes. However, with 3-HAA, it is possible
that much of it may be converted to QA within microenvironments, because
3-HAA 3,4-dioxygenase is the most active enzyme of the KP [115, 116]. However, for practical reasons and until suitable methods
are devised to measure other Kyn metabolites in cellular microenvironments,
emphasis should be placed on QA measurements.

Traditionally, studies of QA and KA have been conducted in relation
to their actions at the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) type of receptors of the
excitatory amino acid glutamate following the pioneering discovery by T W
Stone [117] of QA as agonist and KA
as antagonist at these receptors. This opened a new field of investigation
of Trp metabolism in cognitive and neurological diseases, with QA being
neuronal excitotoxic and KA being cytoprotective. While QA can modulate the
immune system to induce T cell suppression, and thus acts as a
pro-inflammatory Trp metabolite, KA possesses antiinflammatory properties
(see [113] and references cited
therein). KA has so far received only minimal attention in studies on
inflammatory diseases and growing evidence now suggests that it should
receive greater emphasis in future studies. It would therefore appear that,
as in the case of cognitive and neurological diseases, QA and KA may also
play opposing roles in inflammatory diseases [113].

In the above hypothesis [113], the potential role of anthranilic acid (AA) in inflammation is
discussed. AA is not without immunomodulatory activity and many
anti-inflammatory drugs have been developed from the AA nucleus, including
mefenamic acid and diclofenac. The 5 hydroxylated AA metabolite (5-HAA) is a
potent apoptotic agent with a potency equal to that of 3-HK and 3-HAA (see
[113] and references cited
therein). Darlington et al [118]
reported a decrease in the ratio in plasma of [3-HAA]/[AA] in a variety of
neurological and neurodegenerative diseases. This decrease is due to a rise
in [AA] and in some cases also a decrease in [3-HAA]. The authors [118] suggested that this decrease
either reflects inflammatory disease and its progression or is an
antiinflammatory response. I hypothesized in favour of the latter
possibility [113] based among others
on the potential role of KA in the AA elevation. We have previously reported
[119] that KA administration to
rats increases liver [AA] by stimulating the kynureninase A reaction (Kyn
→ AA). In this latter study [119], various changes in KP enzyme activities were observed
following administration of Kyn metabolites. Notably: (1) KA stimulated TDO
possibly by acting via 3-HAA, but inhibited KAT activity; (2) 3-HK inhibited
the kynureninase B reaction (3-HK → 3-HAA); (3) 3-HAA stimulated TDO
but inhibited the kynureninase A and B reactions. These novel effects of Kyn
metabolites point towards new and hitherto unrecognised internal mechanisms
of control of the KP by its intermediates that may contribute to the overall
activity of the pathway.

6.3.5 Modulation of carbohydrate metabolism and other processes by kynurenine
metabolites
Carbohydrate metabolism and its impact on diabetes can be influenced
by kynurenine metabolites, notably QA, XA and PA. For example, activity of
the key gluconeogenic enzyme phospho-enol-pyruvate carboxykinase is
inhibited by QA. In species in which Trp conversion to QA is strong, e.g.
the rat, gluconeogenesis is inhibited by Trp administration, whereas this is
not the case in species, such as gerbil, guinea pig or sheep, which exhibit
poor QA production from Trp [90,
120, 121]. Because of KP similarities with rats,
gluconeogenesis is likely to be inhibited in humans under conditions of
excessive QA elevation or production. It is noteworthy that animal models of
diabetes are mainly those of rodents and pigs, but not species in which QA
production is limited.

Carbohydrate metabolism could also be influenced by XA and PA acting
on insulin. The diabetogenic effect of XA is thought to involve binding of
and hence inactivating insulin [7]. A
high plasma [XA] is associated with high insulin resistance and higher odds
of having diabetes [122]. Urinary
and plasma [XA] is elevated in diabetic patients and experimentally-induced
diabetes in rats [123, 124]. The increased urinary XA
excretion is accompanied by that of Zn in the form of an XA-Zn complex
[123]. Insulin requires Zn at
many levels [125]. Zn absorption and
bioavailability are, however, controlled by another Kyn metabolite picolinic
acid (PA). While there are no available data on [PA] in diabetes, current
evidence suggests a likely increase. Thus, ACMSD activity and mRNA
expression are increased in experimental diabetes, although hepatocyte PA
production is not impaired, and ACMSD activity is greater in kidney than in
liver (for references, see [6]).
Plasma [PA] is however elevated in hepatitis C viral infection, and to a
greater extent if diabetes is present [126]. From this account, it appears that further work on the
roles of XA and PA in diabetes is required, e.g. to establish if the
increased urinary excretion of Zn in diabetes is due in part to a potential
defect in binding to PA in addition to complex formation with XA.

PA and XA are the least studied metabolites of the KP. PA exerts
immunomodulatory effects (see [109])
and its levels are increased in plasma in hepatitis C viral infection and
hepatic cirrhosis [126] and in CSF
in cerebral malaria [127]. Little
else is known about the status of this KP metabolite in other CNS conditions
[128]. With XA, other than its
insulin and Zn binding described above and activation of the malaria
gametocyte [129], evidence exists
for its involvement in synaptic signaling and hence neurotransmission [130]. Thus, more work on these 2 KP
metabolites is required. Kyn metabolites also act as ligands of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), the significance of which will be described in
6.4.2. below.

Kyn metabolites may also play important roles in conditions not
directly associated with inflammation. These include inhibition by KA of
alcohol- and cocaine-seeking behaviour and relapse and induction of aversion
to alcohol by KA, 3-HK and 3-HAA (for references, see [113, 119]).

6.3.6 Niacin synthesis and pellagra prevention
In the absence of adequate intake of niacin (in the form of
nicotinic acid or nicotinamide), its levels are maintained by de
novo synthesis from Trp via the QA arm of the pathway. Niacin
deficiency is the central feature of pellagra, usually referred to as the
disease of the 3 Ds (dermatitis, diarrhoea and dementia, though more
appropriately delirium). Tissues with a great demand for
nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotides to meet their rapid cellular turnover,
e.g. skin, gastrointestinal tract and the nervous system, suffer most from
the resultant NAD+ deficiency.

Nutritional pellagra therefore occurs only if diets are deficient in
both niacin and Trp. Even with marginal niacin, but adequate Trp, intake,
clinical or subclinical pellagra can be induced by drugs interfering with
one or more enzymes of the KP, e.g. by TDO inhibition by some antibiotics
and antiviral drug or kynureninase inhibition by hydrazine compounds or
oestrogens [7, 131].

Subsistence on a largely maize staple [7, 131] led to a
widespread incidence of pellagra in Southern Europe during the 18th century
and in the USA following the American civil war. Although maize (and
sorghum, widely used in India) are Trp-deficient, they contain adequate
amounts of niacin, but in a polysaccharide-bound form (niacytin) that cannot
be hydrolysed by mammalian digestive enzymes. Unfortunately, those who
introduced maize in Southern Europe ignored the importance of the liming
process, a procedure used for millennia by the peasants of Central America
in the preparation of tortillas, that causes the release of niacin from
niacytin [131]. Also, the presence
of high levels of leucine in maize and sorghum aggravates the pellagra by
activation of TDO and ACMSD and inhibition of kynureninase and QPRT [7, 131, 132]. While
pellagra continues to result from malnutrition in certain parts of the
world, it appears occasionally in developed countries in association with
alcoholism and it may be relevant that, among other effects, chronic ethanol
consumption inhibits TDO activity [74, 132].

It is generally accepted that 1 mg of niacin arises from intake of
60 mg of Trp [66, 67], though this ratio shows individual
variations and can be influenced by factors including nutrients, hormones,
pregnancy, drugs and diseases, with some nutrients and hormones enhancing
and others suppressing the conversion of Trp to nicotinamide [133]. The niacin status is generally
determined by measuring urinary excretion of
N1-methylnicotinamide and its 2 oxidation products 2-PY and 4-PY
(Figure 5) [134, 135]. The
correlations between daily niacin intake and urinary excretion of 2-PY and
4-PY are comparable and more superior to that between niacin intake and
N1-methylnicotinamide excretion [135]. TDO gene deletion in mice, however, still allows
synthesis of nicotinamide and NAD+ to proceed [69].

6.3.7 Control of NAD+ synthesis
The final major function of the hepatic KP is production of the
redox cofactor NAD+, from which NADP+ is formed by the
action of NAD+ kinase (Figure
5). Both oxidized dinucleotides and their reduced forms play
vital roles in metabolism at multiple levels and in other cell functions and
are therefore essential to life. As will be outlined in 6.4.10. below,
defects in NAD+ availability have negative health consequences.
As the KP favours the arm leading to QA formation (Figures 4 and 5),
it must be concluded that NAD+ synthesis from QA and hence from
Trp is quantitatively more important than that from nicotinamide or
nicotinic acid. This is illustrated by the findings [63–65]
that dietary Trp is more effective than dietary nicotinamide or nicotinic
acid in elevating liver nicotinamide dinucleotides and urinary levels of
N1-methylnicotinamide. Studies by the group of Bender [7, 64, 65] suggest that: (1)
activities of nicotinamide deamidase (NMD) and nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase (NMPRT), both of which are substrate-saturated at
normal (steady-state) levels of liver nicotinamide determine the
incorporation of nicotinamide into the dinucleotides; (2) whereas activities
of the above 2 enzymes show a significant correlation with hepatic
nicotinamide dinucleotide levels, this is not case with nicotinic acid
phosphoribosyltransferase (NPRT), which functions normally just below its
Vmax; (3) by contrast, although QPRT
activity also does not correlate with liver dinucleotides, this enzyme
operates at [QA] well below its Km, thus
suggesting that increased availability of QA could lead to greater formation
of NaMN and hence NAD+; (4) although liver dinucleotide levels
are increased after a single large dose of nicotinamide, this is more likely
to result from decreased NAD+ catabolism, rather than increased
synthesis, because both nicotinamide and its N1-methyl metabolite
inhibit the NAD+-degrading (depleting) enzyme poly-(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP; EC 2.4.2.30). The significance of PARP will be discussed
below.

It is important to note that, whereas QA does not accumulate in
liver after Trp loading, presumably because of its rapid metabolism to
NAD+, activated cells of the immune system accumulate
relatively large amounts of QA and it has been suggested that this is to
provide the substrate for NAD+ synthesis and the PARP reaction in
response to immune-related oxidative damage [106].

6.4 Pharmacological targeting of the pathway
The relatively large number of enzymatic steps in the KP renders it open
to multiple targeting for pharmacological intervention. Of the actual precursors
and intermediates of the pathway, Trp, nicotinic acid, nicotinamide and
kynurenic acid can also be targeted for therapeutic use. The Trp literature
includes details of research on and application of, individual targets, and only
brief accounts will therefore be presented in this section.

6.4.1 Tryptophan, nicotinic acid and nicotinamide
As stated in 3.2, Trp has been
used as antidepressant, with only modest efficacy when used alone, but more
effectively in combination with antidepressants [34]. Many antidepressants also inhibit liver TDO
activity and lower circulating cortisol, thus providing the means of
preventing excessive hepatic Trp degradation, thereby increasing Trp
availability to the brain for 5-HT synthesis. Potent TDO inhibitors have
been developed for use in cancer immunotherapy (see below) and there is no
reason why they should not be effective as antidepressants, either alone or
in combination with Trp. As will be discussed below, the same principle
applies to the potential treatment of acute hepatic porphyrias by TDO
inhibitors.

Targeting Trp availability to tumors has been suggested as a
strategy to overcome tumoral immune escape [13]. Tumors need Trp and other nutrients to stimulate their
growth and proliferation. They upregulate amino acid transporters, 4 of
which (SLC1A5, SLC7A5, SLC7A11 and SLC6A14) are of special interest in
cancer biology [136]. Of these,
SLC6A14 transports all essential amino acids [137]. α-Methyltryptophan
(α-MT) inhibits SLC6A14 function thereby
preventing amino acid uptake by cancer cells [138] and has been shown to undermine growth of
oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells [139]. Tumors are sensitive to changes in [Trp]. When
[Trp] is decreased to ≤ 5 μM, tumors
upregulate specific Trp transporters [140]. At the same time, the increased uptake of Trp coupled with
upregulation of IDO and, where appropriate, TDO, ensures adequate formation
of immunosuppressive Kyn metabolites (3-HK, 3-HAA, QA), which tumors use to
undermine effector T cell proliferation and function and thereby escape an
immune attack. T cell proliferation is inhibited at [Trp] of < 10
μM [141]. Thus, the narrow range of [Trp] of 5–10
μM is critical for survival of tumors and
effector T cells. Consequently, strategies aimed at maintaining effector T
cell function by ensuring that tumoral [Trp] remains above 10
μM should be pursued in conjunction with
strategies preventing production of immunosuppressive kynurenines, namely
those involving inhibition of IDO/TDO upregulation and limiting Trp
availability to tumors. In human colon and stomach cancer tissues, tumoral
[Trp] can reach 70 and 40 μM respectively and a much
higher value (270 μM) has been reported in a mouse
model of CT26 colon carcinoma (for references, see [13]). In the above proposed targeting strategy [13], inhibition of amino acid
transporter function by α-MT is the first line of
action. Decreasing plasma free Trp availability to tumors, which is enhanced
in cancer through decreased albumin and increased NEFA, could be achieved by
albumin infusions and use of antilipolytic agents, e.g. nicotinic acid. IDO/
TDO inhibition should complete the proposed strategy and is discussed
further below. Both nicotinic acid and nicotinamide have been used in
therapy of certain cancers, but for reasons other than modulation of Trp
metabolism and disposition (for references, see [13]). TDO inhibition by nicotinamide [73] will be discussed further
below.

6.4.2 Kynurenic acid
KA exerts effects in the central nervous system (CNS) and the
periphery which render it a target for pharmacotherapy at various levels. In
the CNS, blocking the excessive production of KA in schizophrenia requires
the use of KAT inhibitors (see below). In the periphery, KA affects the
immune system and gastrointestinal tract (GIT) function. It acts as a ligand
for the orphan G protein-coupled receptor GPR35, which is expressed in both
types of cells [142], but
involvement of this receptor in the antiinflammatory activity of KA is
somewhat controversial [142, 143]. The KA inhibition of tumour
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)
production by mononuclear cells, high mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1)
production by monocytes and human neutrophil peptide 1-3 (HNP1-3) secretion
by neutrophils has been shown [144]
to be stronger with
2-(2-N,Ndimethylaminoethylamine-1-carbonyl)-1H-quinolin-4-one hydrochloride,
a KA analogue, and exploration of this analogue activity in human
inflammatory disease has been proposed. KA production and KAT activity are
decreased in retinal ganglion cell loss during retinal neurodegeneration
[145]. In a mouse model of
ocular hypertension, age-related decreases in [KA] and KAT activities are
observed [145]. Intense KAT
activities have also been demonstrated in the corpora amylacea of the human
retina [145]. These changes justify
exploring a potential role of KA in these retinal conditions.

[KA] is relatively high in the GIT [146] and its serum concentration is elevated in inflammatory
bowel disease [147], but is
decreased in the non-inflammatory bowel condition, the irritable bowel
syndrome [148, 149]. This latter study also showed decreased serum
levels of Kyn and 3-HAA, suggesting inhibition of Trp degradation at a
step(s) beyond that catalysed by TDO/IDO and it was also suggested that the
reported increase in serum free [Trp] increases serotonin levels, which may
explain the increased gut secretions and motility described in
diarrhoea-predominant IBS.

Another receptor involving KA is the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR), which is a ligand-activated transcription factor mediating the
toxicity of environmental chemicals, such as the dioxins. Activation of the
AhR induces toxic responses including cell damage and carcinogenesis [150]. The AhR can also control immune
responses in both protective and destructive ways [150, 151]. For
example, whereas endogenous ligands of the AhR facilitate a dampening of the
immune response to prevent excessive inflammation and autoimmunity,
exogenous ligands act as signals to enhance inflammatory responses to
infection and resistance of cancer to its own destruction [150], resulting in a state of
“pathological immunosuppression”, a mechanism of which based
on changes in Trp availability has been suggested (see [6, 109]). Of the Trp metabolite ligands of the AhR (Kyn, KA and
XA), KA has the highest ligand activity (see [109]). The dual role of activation of the AhR is
illustrated by 2 examples involving KA. While KA activation of the AhR
allows certain tumor cells to escape immune surveillance by secreting large
amounts of IL-6 [152], deletion of
the mouse AhR gene increases production of KA and expression of Kyn
aminotransferase II (KAT II) in mouse cortex and striatum, thus protecting
the brain against excitotoxicity and oxidative stress [153]. Other examples of this dual role and KA
involvement are detailed in the excellent review by Wirthgen et al. [143], based on which these latter
authors cautioned against targeting KA for therapeutic interventions to
avoid adverse consequences, at least until further in-depth analysis of the
interference of KA with various immune-related signaling pathways is made.
It is noteworthy in the context of the AhR receptor that Kyn binding
regulates the expression of the IL-10-RA (interleukin 10 receptor alpha
subunit) in intestinal epithelia thus affording acceleration of
IL-10-dependent wound closure [154].
Whether KA binding to the AhR can cause similar changes is currently
unknown.

Tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase and indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase As stated in 3.2. above, TDO inhibition has been suggested as an
antidepressant strategy, either alone or in combination with Trp. In
addition to antidepressant drugs which also inhibit TDO activity, many other
compounds used as adjuncts to or augmenters of antidepressant medication
also inhibit TDO and some have been demonstrated to exert an antidepressant
effect of their own or to accelerate clinical response to established
antidepressants [34].

TDO inhibition may also play a role in combating anxiety and
neurodegeneration in conditions such as Alzheimer’s
Huntington’s and Parkinson’s diseases. Deletion of the TDO
gene results in decreasing anxiety levels in mice, stimulation of
neurogenesis and enhanced memory [68,
71]. As far as I could ascertain,
no corresponding studies with TDO inhibitors in these human conditions have
been performed.

TDO inhibition could also form the basis of therapy of acute hepatic
porphyria. As stated in 6.3.3. above,
liver TDO utilises the small haem pool that regulates haem biosynthesis by
repression of 5-ALAS. Prevention of this utilisation enables the regulatory
haem pool to exert its feedback control of its own synthesis. This
prevention involves inhibition or prevention of the conjugation of apo-TDO
with haem. There is evidence that treatments which cause this prevention are
effective therapies of acute porphyric attacks. One such treatment is
glucose, which is used in acute porphyric attacks precipitated by fasting.
In rats, haem utilisation by TDO is enhanced by starvation via
glucocorticoid induction of the apoenzyme [93]. Other precipitants of acute porphyric attacks are drugs,
which are thought to act by direct 5-ALAS induction. Such induction may be
overcome if availability of the regulatory haem pool is increased by
inhibition of TDO conjugation with haem. TDO inhibition is therefore a
potential new strategy for therapy of the hepatic porphyrias. Currently,
therapy involves intravenous haem preparations or glucose.

TDO inhibition for cancer therapy has recently been explored at the
experimental level. IDO1 inhibition for cancer therapy has been explored
much earlier and will be discussed here along with TDO inhibition. Emphasis
on TDO inhibition was prompted by 2 major observations: (1) IDO1 inhibition
is not always effective in arresting the growth of tumors expressing IDO1;
(2) demonstration of TDO expression in certain tumors. The association of
IDO1 with cancer has arisen following the discovery of the immunomodulatory
properties of this enzyme. Human cancerous tissue expression of IDO1, IDO2
and TDO2 has been studied [155].
Many types of cancers express IDO1, whereas that of IDO2 is negligible. TDO2
is also expressed in many cancers, but at lower levels than IDO1, except in
hepatocellular carcinoma, where expression is considerably higher among all
tissues examined and relative to that of IDO1. IDO1 inhibition has been an
active targeting area for cancer therapy. Many IDO1 [156–158] and some TDO [159–161]
inhibitors have been and continue to be developed. These and others have
recently been reviewed [162]. Many
issues need to be considered in developing IDO1 inhibitors [163], some of which are also
applicable to TDO2 inhibitors. Among these issues is the inhibitory
mechanism and its confirmation in vivo. Many IDO/TDO
inhibitors act by a Trp competitive mechanism. Additionally, as stated above
[77, 78], IDO is inhibited by [Trp] > 50
μM. An excess of Trp could therefore undermine
IDO1 inhibition in tumors. By contrast, the greater capacity of TDO for Trp
will not cause reversal of the TDO inhibition by TDO inhibitors, unless too
excessive Trp levels are reached in tumors. However, the increase in plasma
[Trp] resulting from TDO inhibition in the host liver can lead to Trp
accumulation in tumors. Given the discussion in 6.4.1. above and the detailed account in [13], a prudent strategy is to block Trp
transport into tumors as a first line of attack and in conjunction with
IDO1/TDO2 inhibition. Some negative or moderately successful outcomes of
clinical trials with such inhibitors may be explained by tumoral immune
escape based on the above issues. Also, as emphasized by Platten et
al [160], preclinical
studies have not considered exploring potential mechanisms of this immune
escape. The proposed targeting of Trp availability to tumors [13] is one such approach in this
direction. Furthermore, current trials do not select patients based on IDO1
expression in tumor tissue or assessment of systemic IDO1 activity by
analysis of Trp and its metabolites in patients’ serum [161].

6.4.3 N’-Formylkynurenine formamidase
A wide range of compounds inhibit activity of this enzyme, including
organophosphate insecticides and metal cations [54]. Of the latter, Ag+ is the strongest
inhibitor, causing 89% inhibition at 10 μM [164]. However, most of these
inhibitors are not suitable for use in humans and those that can be used in
humans are weak ones. Although NFK formamidase activity is normally abundant
in liver and possibly also other tissues, its inhibition can still block the
formation of Kyn and its metabolites. Such inhibition could achieve the same
aims as that of TDO and IDO and, in fact, development of formamidase
inhibitors based on structure of the enzyme has been suggested [165].

6.4.4 Kynurenine aminotransferase
As stated in 6.1. above, the KAT reactions (K → KA and 3-HK
→ XA) are minor ones limited by availability of the substrates
because of the high Kms of both KAT A and KAT B
respectively for their respective substrates. There are 4 KAT isoenzymes
(KATs I, II, III and IV) with wide tissue distribution, of which KAT II has
the highest activity in brain (60%). The importance of KAT in brain stems
from the fact that it catalyses the formation of the NMDA receptor
antagonist KA [117], which is
cytoprotective and may thus be beneficial for cognitive function in patients
with neurodegenerative and other CNS diseases. Elevation of KA levels in
brain and CSF of patients with schizophrenia, however, induces a state of
glutamatergic hypoactivity [166,
167]. Targeting KAT in
schizophrenia has therefore been an active area of research [168–170] and detailed accounts of drug development of KAT
inhibitors have been published [171–173]. As well
as minimising glutamatergic hypoactivity, KAT inhibition also reduces the
activity of mid-brain dopamine neurons [174], which is enhanced in schizophrenia.

KAT is inhibited by hydrazine compounds, some of which are used in
medicine, e.g. the anti-tuberculous drug isonicotinic acid hydrazide, which
causes a 92% inhibition when given in the rat’s diet at a 0.05%
concentration [175]. The peripheral
aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (ALAAD) inhibitors
carbidopa and benserazide, which are used in Parkinson’s disease in
conjunction with L-Dopa, also inhibit KAT activity both
in vitro and after administration to rats [119]. When tested in
vitro, carbidopa is twice as effective as benserazide (67% vs 33% inhibition
at 25 μM). KAT inhibition by chronic benserazide
administration leads to accumulation of Kyn and 3-HK in liver and decreases
in [KA] and [XA] in serum. These results suggest that benserazide may be
useful in the treatment of schizophrenia. Two clinical trials have, however,
produced negative results [176,
177], nevertheless, the decrease
in [KA] [119] warrants further
exploration of the potential clinical utility of benserazide in
schizophrenia.

The above and other hydrazine compounds inhibit pyridoxal
5’-phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzymes by forming hydrazones with the
cofactor, thus preventing the latter from binding to the enzymes [178]. Oestrogens and their derivatives
can also inactivate PLP-dependent enzymes, e.g. KAT [179]. Thus, oestradiol disulphate is a strong
inhibitor of KAT II (IC50 = 26.3 μM),
whereas oestradiol itself is a much weaker inhibitor (IC50
> 2 mM). It thus appears that the 17-sulphate moiety in oestradiol
disulphate confers a much greater inhibitory potency. The authors [179] suggested that this can also be
exploited in the design of novel KAT II inhibitors and can also contribute
to improvement of existing inhibitors.

Inhibition of KAT B leading to decreased formation of XA may
represent an important strategy for combating malaria. XA is the
gametocyte-activating agent [129,
180] and while developmental
efforts may be aimed at vaccine therapy, exploring the mechanism of
gametocyte activation by XA may improve our understanding of the physiology
of this parasite and lead to drug development including that aimed at
blocking XA formation.

The 2 KAT isoenzymes responsible for KA formation in brain
astrocytes are KAT I and KAT II and their targeting can be useful in
treatment of schizophrenia. Inhibitors of these isoenzymes have been
reviewed [162]. KAT I inhibitors are
mainly Trp derivatives, whereas KAT II inhibitors include Kyn derivatives,
fluoroquinolones and hydroxamate derivatives.

6.4.5 Kynurenine monooxygenase (Kynurenine hydroxylase)
KMO has been the subject of intense research as a potential target
for development of pharmacotherapy of many conditions, notably those
affecting CNS function. A glance at Figure
4 will show that KMO inhibition should result in the following
important changes in KP metabolite formation in liver, plasma, brain and/or
CSF: (1) accumulation of Kyn; (2) consequent to the increase in this
substrate, production of KA by the KAT A and of AA by the kynureninase A
reactions is increased; (3) decreased formation of 3-HK; (4) a consequent
decrease in production of subsequent metabolites from the main oxidative
route, namely 3-HAA, QA and PA and from the transamination arm leading to XA
formation by KAT B. These changes, which have important implications for
drug development for a variety of disease states, can be seen from published
data of the effects of the KMO inhibitors
m-nitrobenzoylalanine in rats [181, 182] and
mice [183] and
3,4-dimethoxy-N-[4-(3-nitrophenyl)thiazol-2-yl]benzenesulfonamide
(Ro-61-8048) in mice [184], and of
the effects of targeted deletion of the KMO gene in mice [185, 186]. These changes are desirable for achieving protection
against the patho-physiological disturbances encountered in many disease
states. A variety of studies have been reported on KMO inhibition in disease
models. These include: (1) prolonged survival of mice with cerebral malaria
by KMO inhibition by Ro-61-8048 [184]; (2) reduction of neuropathic pain in rats by the KMO
inhibitors Ro-61-8048 and the pro-drug JM6
[2-(3,4-dimethoxybenzenesulfonylamino)-4-(3- nitrophenyl)-5-(piperidin-1-yl)
methylthiazole,187]; (3)
prevention by JM6 of spacial memory deficits, anxiety behaviour and synaptic
loss in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease and extension of life
span, prevention of synaptic loss and reduction of microglial activation in
a mouse model of Huntington’s disease [188]; (4) prevention of multi-organ failure in a rat
model of acute pancreatitis by the potent and specific KMO inhibitor the
oxazolidine compound GSK 180 [189].
The status of current and new KMO inhibitors has been reviewed [162, 190] and it remains to be seen if or when some of these will be
shown to be therapeutically effective in neurodegenerative diseases.

The accumulation of Kyn following KMO inhibition will increase both
KA and AA levels. While increasing [KA] may not be desirable in
schizophrenia, it can provide neuronal protection by combating the
excitotoxicity of QA and reducing inflammation in inflammatory disease. The
AA elevation may be of interest in relation to inflammatory disease,
schizophrenia and diabetes and, as discussed earlier, as well as acting via
its powerful apoptotic metabolite 5-HAA, AA can also decrease QA formation
by inhibiting 3-HAAO [191].

The potential antiinflammatory consequences of KMO inhibition extend
further down the KP via decreased production of 3-HK, 3-HAA and QA, given
their pro-inflammatory properties discussed above in 6.3.4. Decreased
formation of these Kyn metabolites by KMO inhibition can also prevent
tumoral immune escape and it is noteworthy that KMO is upregulated in
hepatocellular carcinoma [192] and
triple negative breast cancer [193].
The potential impact of KMO inhibition on XA formation remains to be
explored.

6.4.6 Kynureninase
Kynureninase inhibition will increase the concentrations of Kyn, KA,
3-HK and XA, and decrease those of AA, 3-HAA and QA. Some of these effects
have been reported [181, 182]. The kynureninase inhibitor
nicotinylalanine has been reported [194] to inhibit the increase in rat brain [QA] induced by
endotoxin administration. Among current therapeutic agents are the
peripheral ALAAD inhibitors benserazide and carbidopa used in
Parkinson’s disease (see 3.2.
above). Both drugs are also kynureninase inhibitors, but, because they also
inhibit KAT activity (see 6.4.5.
above), the expected elevations of KA and XA do not occur [119]. Potent inhibitors of
kynureninase have been synthesized [195] and patented [196]
but await further investigation.

6.4.7 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid 3,4-dioxygenase
Inhibition of 3HAAO will block the formation of the excitotoxic
metabolite QA and the antiinflammatory metabolite PA and cause accumulation
of 3-HAA. While lowering [QA] may be desirable, increasing [3-HAA] is not,
as it possesses proinflammatory properties. 3-HAAO inhibition may be
justified if the enzyme is overexpressed, as has been demonstrated in the
hepatic proteome of the hyperlipidaemic substance for normal cell function
and integrity mouse HcB19 model [197] and brain of the triple transgenic Alzheimer’s Disease
mouse model [198]. Even here, a
better strategy is to limit 3-HAA availability by blocking the KP at an
earlier step, namely that involving KMO.

6.4.8 ACMSD (Picolinate carboxylase)
As described in 6.1. above,
ACMSD converts ACMS to AMS, which can either undergo non-enzymic cyclisation
to PA or continued degradation to acetyl CoA. Inhibition of ACMSD will
therefore divert ACMS towards QA formation and subsequent NAD+
synthesis. NAD+ is a vital substance for maintenance of normal
cell activity and functions, including cell signaling and gene regulation,
and a decrease in its levels is associated with a variety of disease states.
Pharmacological enhancement of NAD+ synthesis or availability is
therefore an important goal. Recently, a potent ACMSD inhibitor, TES 1025,
with an IC50 of 13 nM, has been developed and was shown to
increase cellular NAD+ levels [199]. The application of this inhibitor to disease therapy
remains to be seen.

Phthalate esters, especially di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate and its
metabolite mono (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, MEHP), have been shown [200] to increase tissue levels of QA
by inhibiting ACMSD. The authors suggested that phthalate ester toxicity
could involve excessive QA production if a Trp-rich diet is consumed
simultaneously. While increasing NAD+ levels may be desirable in
some situations, a sustained inhibition of ACMSD activity may be
undesirable, as it can lead to accumulation of QA with a resulting potential
excitotoxicity. A genetic mutation of ACMSD has been observed in a family
with Parkinson’s disease [201]. This latter group have also shown [202] that deletion of the ACMSD gene leads to a
20-50-fold increase in [QA] in liver, kidney, brain and plasma and suggested
that this could be a suitable model for studies that can lead to new
therapies of depression and neurodegenerative diseases.

6.4.9 Enzymes of the pathways for NAD+ synthesis and
consumption
The balance between activity of the NAD+-biosynthetic
(the de novo and salvage) pathways and that of pathways of
its consumption determines tissue NAD+ levels. As stated in
6.3.7. above, an adequate supply of NAD+ is vital for cell
function at many levels, with shortages being associated with negative
health consequences. Thus, NAD+ controls cellular metabolism and
energy production. Processes such as glycolysis, the citric acid cycle,
fatty acid and amino acid oxidation, the pentose phosphate pathway,
biosynthetic processes and biological oxidation via cytochrome
P-450 are all controlled by the
NAD+(P+) H couples. The review by Srivastava
[203] is informative. Lack of
NAD+ can result in oxidative damage, DNA damage, muscle
degeneration, inflammatory responses and age-related diseases [204, 205]. A variety of studies have implicated enzymes of
NAD+ synthesis and utilisation in disease states. Examples
include QPRT suppression of spontaneous cell death by lowering the
overproduction of active caspase-3 [206], potential targeting of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis with high affinity inhibitors of NAD synthetase,
which is essential for survival of this pathogen [207], development of activators of NMNAT/NAMNAT for
neuronal protection [208], over
expression of this latter enzyme protects against acute CNS
neurodegeneration by inhibiting excitotoxic-necrotic cell death [209], potential use of inhibitors of
NMPRT in antitumor therapy by blocking glycolysis at the
glyceraladehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase step [210]; the potential use of micro-RNA 26b as a
suppressor of colorectal cancer tumor by inhibiting NMPRT [211], and use of NNMT as a target for
treatment of obesity and type II diabetes [212].

NADase (NAD glycohydrolase) and streptolysin O are 2 proteins
secreted by group A streptococci which promote virulence [213] and could therefore be potential
targets for suppressing virulence [214]. Carbocyclic NAD analogues have been proposed as NADase
inhibitors [215].

PARPs [poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases] is a family of enzymes that
catalyse the transfer of ADP-ribose to target proteins, thus influencing
many important processes, e.g. chromatin structure, transcription,
replication, recombination, and DNA repair [216]. The latter effect is of special interest, as tumors may
rely on this property of PARPs for survival. PARP inhibitors are therefore
potential cancer therapeutic agents. Preclinical studies have shown PARP
inhibitors in combination with other drugs or ionising radiation are
effective against tumors and clinical trials are already in progress [217]. Preclinical data also suggest
that PARP inhibitors may be effective therapies for non-cancer conditions,
including stroke, neurotrauma, circulatory shock and acute myocardial
infarction [217]. Other
NAD+-consuming enzymes are sirtuins and c-ADP ribose
synthases, both of which play major roles in control of NAD+
homeostasis, thus impacting many vital functions and are amenable to
pharmacological interventions [203].

7 Conclusions and General Comments
The above account has demonstrated the multiple roles the essential amino
acid L-tryptophan and its various metabolites play in health and
disease and the wide range of scientific disciplines and medical specialties for
which Trp metabolism is of special importance. Trp research over the past 7 decades
has provided and continues to provide important information expanding our knowledge
of physiological processes and facilitating our understanding of many disease
states, ranging from abnormal behaviour and mental illness to carcinogenesis. Its
unique involvement in health and disease has rendered Trp metabolism a fertile area
for pharmacotherapeutic interventions and pharmacologists and other biomedical
researchers can play an important role in drug developmental efforts for addressing
many disease states. It is hoped that this review will stimulate interest among
researchers in further enriching our knowledge of Trp and utilising it in disease
therapy.

Acknowledgements
The author held an honorary professorial position at Cardiff Metropolitan University
between September 2006 and September 2016. Earlier studies by the author referenced
here were supported in part by the employing authority Cardiff & Vale NHS
Trust and its predecessor South Glamorgan Health Authority and by project grants
from the UK Medical Research Council and the Wellcome Trust.

Competing Interests

The author declares no competing interests.

Figure 1 The hydroxylation or serotonin pathway in brain and melatonin pathway in
pineal.
Abbreviations used are: AANAT (arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase), ALAAD
(aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase), ALDH (aldehyde
dehydrogenase), BH2 and BH4 (dihydro- and
tetrahydro-biopterin), HIOMT
(hydoxyindole-O-methyltransferase), MAO (monoamine oxidase),
PLP (pyridoxal 5’-phosphate), TPH (tryptophan hydroxylase).

Figure 2 The decarboxylation or tryptamine pathway.
Abbreviations used are: ALAAD (aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxylase), ALDH (aldehyde dehydrogenase), MAO (monoamine oxidase), NAD(H)
[oxidized and (reduced) nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide], PLP (pyridoxal
5’-phosphate).

Figure 3 The transamination or indolepyruvic acid pathway.
Abbreviations used are: ALDH (aldehyde dehydrogenase), IPD (indole pyruvate
decarboxylase) ILDH (indole lactate dehydrogenase), ROS (reactive oxygen
species), TAT (tryptophan aminotransferase).

Figure 4 The oxidative or kynurenine pathway up to quinolinic acid and down to acetyl
CoA.
Adapted from Figure 1 in ref [6] (A. A.-B. Badawy. Kynurenine pathway of
tryptophan metabolism: regulatory and functional aspects. Int J Tryptophan Res.
10, 1-20, 2017 doi: 10.1177/1178646917691938. Abbreviations used are: ACMS
(2-Amino-3-carboxymuconic acid-6-semialdehyde), AMS (2-Aminomuconic acid
-6-semialdehyde), IDO (indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase), TDO (tryptophan
2,3-dioxygenase).

Figure 5 NAD+ synthesis from quinolinic acid and via the salvage
pathway.
Adapted from Figure 1 in ref [6] (A. A.-B. Badawy. Kynurenine pathway of
tryptophan metabolism: regulatory and functional aspects. Int J Tryptophan Res.
10, 1-20, 2017 doi: 10.1177/1178646917691938.

Table 1 Role of tryptophan and its metabolites in various disciplines.
Discipline	Area	Metabolite, role and example	
Basic sciences	Mammalian biochemistry	Trp and metabolites and various body
systems	
	Insect biochemistry	3-HK → xanthommatin in Drosophila	
	Plant biochemistry	IAA as plant hormone (auxin)	
	Behavioural science	IPA, 5-HT, KA, QA	
	Immunology	Kyn and its metabolites (KA, QA, 3-HK, 3-HAA)
as immunomodulators	
	Neurochemistry	Trp, 5-HT, KA, QA	
	Nutrition	Trp, NA, NAM, QA	
	Pharmacology	5-HT receptor modulators	
	Physiology	KA and QA as NMDA receptor modulators;
melatonin and circadian rhythm	
Medical Specialties	Cardiology	KA and inflammatory response	
	Diabetes	XA, PA, AA, QA	
	Gastroenterology	Serotonin, kynurenine metabolites in irritable
bowel syndrome	
	Hepatology	Trp in hepatic cirrhosis and
encephalopathy	
	Obs & Gynaecology	Trp utilization, Kyn metabolites as
immunosuppressants	
	Oncology	Immunosuppressive kynurenine metabolites	
	Ophthalmology	Kyn and 5-HAA elevations and 3-HK
photo-oxidation in cataract	
	Parasitology	XA in malaria and IPA in trypanosomiasis	
	Rheumatology	Kyn metabolites elevation after IDO
induction	
	Urology	Kyn metabolite elevation	
	Veterinary medicine	Trp metabolism in herbivores	
	Virology and other infections	Kyn metabolite elevation by IDO induction	
Psychiatry	Alcoholism	5-HT deficiency, KA, 3-HK and 3-HAA as
aversive agents	
	Anxiety	5-HT, KA, QA	
	Depression	5-HT	
	Drug dependence	5-HT, KA	
	OCD	5-HT	
	Schizophrenia	KA	
Neurological disease	Alzheimer’s disease	Kyn metabolites as immunomodulators	
	Chronic brain injury	Kyn metabolites as immunomodulators	
	Huntington’s disease	Kyn metabolites as immunomodulators	
	Stroke	Kyn metabolites as immunomodulators	
Moﬆ of the relevant sources are referenced in the liﬆ
of references. Other sources can be accessed through search engines.
Abbreviations used: AA (anthranilic acid), 3-HAA (3-hydroxyanthranilic
acid), 5-HAA (5-hydroxyanthranilic acid), 3-HK (3-hydroxykynurenine), 5-HT
(5-hydroxytryptamine or serotonin), IAA (indoleacetic acid), IDO
(indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase), IPA (indolepyruvic acid), KA (kynurenic
acid), Kyn (kynurenine), NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate), NAM (nicotinamide), NA
(nicotinic acid), PA (picolinic acid), QA (quinolinic acid).

Table 2 Plasma tryptophan disposition.
Parameter	Change	Mechanism	Examples of effectors	
Free Trp	Decrease	TDO/IDO induction	Glucocorticoids/interferon-γ	
		Inhibition of lipolysis	Insulin, nicotinic acid, antilipolytic
agents	
	Increase	TDO inhibition	glucose, nicotinamide, antidepressants	
		Displacement from albumin	NEFA, catecholamines, ethanol, salicylate	
		Decreased albumin	Pregnancy, liver and kidney diseases	
	
Total Trp	Decrease	TDO/IDO induction	Glucocorticoids/interferon-γ	
	Increase	TDO inhibition	glucose, nicotinamide, antidepressants	
	
% Free Trp	Unaltered	TDO/IDO induction, TDO inhibition		
	Decrease	Increased albumin binding		
	Increase	Decreased albumin binding		
Reproduced here from Table 2 in ref [12] A. A.-B. Badawy. Tryptophan metabolism, disposition and
utilisation in pregnancy. Biosci Rep. 35, art: be00261 / doi 10.1042/BSR20150197, 2015.

Abbreviations used: IDO (indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase), NEFA
(non-esterified fatty acids), TDO (tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase, formerly
tryptophan pyrrolase)), Trp (tryptophan). The % free Trp is an expression of
Trp binding to albumin and is = 100 X [free Trp]/[total Trp].

Table 3 Pharmacological targeting of the serotonin, tryptamine and indolepyruvate
pathways.
Pathway	Enzyme/metabolite	Intended
change	effector	Condition(s)	
Serotonin	TPH2	activation	Trp	depression, anxiety	
	TPH1	inhibition	various	osteoporosis, irritable bowel syndrome,
carcinoid syndrome, obesity, ulcerative colitis, pulmonary arterial
hypertension	
	ALAAD	inhibition	carbidopa, benserazide	Parkinson’s disease	
	MAO	inhibition	tranylcypromine and other MAOI	depression, Parkinson’s disease, panic
and post-traumatic stress disorders, prostate cancer	
	Melatonin	various uses	melatonin	autism spectrum disorders, cancer,
mitochondrial protection, sleep	
Tryptamine	Tryptamine	halogenation	derivatives to monitor brain function	Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s
schizophrenia	
		Biotransformation	derivatives as hallucinogens	drug dependence	
Indolepyruvate	Indolepyruvic acid	antioxidant	IPA, KA	epilepsy, cerebral ischaemia,
Alzheimer’s disease	
		Inhibition of IL-1β	IPA	overcoming immune escape by Trypanosomes	
Abbreviations used: ALAAD (aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxylase), IL-1β (interleukin-1β) IPA (indolepyruvic
acid), KA (kynurenic acid), MAO (monoamine oxidase), MAOI (monoamine oxidase
inhibitors), TPH1 and TPH2 (isoforms of tryptophan hydroxylase), Trp
(tryptophan).

Table 4 Functions of the kynurenine pathway.
Function	Mediator (mechanism)	
Detoxification of tryptophan	TDO (Glucocorticoid induction)	
Control of plasma tryptophan
availability	TDO (Trp flux and oxidation)	
Control of liver haem biosynthesis	TDO (Utilisation of the regulatory haem
pool)	
Modulation of the immune system	Kyn, KA, 3-HK, 3-HAA, QA, PA (Cytokine
induction of IDO)	
Modulation of carbohydrate metabolism	XA, PA (Binding of insulin and Zn); QA
(inhibition of PEPCK)	
Pellagra prevention	QA, Nicotinic acid, nicotinamide
(NAD+ synthesis)	
NAD+ synthesis	QA, nicotinic acid, nicotinamide
(De novo and Salvage pathways)	
Abbreviations used: 3-HAA (3-hydroxyanthranilic acid), 3-HK
(3-hydroxykynurenine), IDO (indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase), KA (kynurenic
acid), Kyn (kynurenine), NAD+ (oxidized nicotinamide-adenine
dinucleotide), PEPCK (phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase), PA (picolinic
acid), QA (quinolinic acid), TDO (tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase), Trp
(tryptophan), XA (xanthurenic acid).

Table 5 Pharmacological targeting of the kynurenine pathway.
Target	Condition	Mechanisms and effectors	
Trp and metabolites:	
Trp	tumoral immune escape	Decrease tumoral uptake by α-MT	
		Decrease plasma free Trp by albumin
infusions	
		Decreased plasma free Trp by antilipolytic
agents	
Nicotinic acid	cancer	Decreased plasma free Trp by inhibition of
lipolysis in host	
Nicotinamide	cancer	TDO inhibition in tumors and hosts	
Kynurenic acid	Alcoholism	Aversion to alcohol by ALDH inhibition	
	Schizophrenia	KAT inhibition	
	Inflammatory diseases	KA analogues	
	Retinal degeneration	Increasing KA formation by Trp?	
	GIT diseases	Increasing KA formation by Trp	
Enzymes:	
TDO	Depression	Increased serotonin synthesis by TDO
inhibition (antidepressants, others)	
	Neurodegeneration	Increased KA formation	
	Anxiety	Increased brain serotonin by TDO
inhibition	
	Hepatic porphyrias	Decreased haem utilisation by TDO inhibitors
(glucose, others?)	
	Cancer, immune escape	Decreased immunosuppressive kynurenines by TDO
inhibitors	
IDO	cancer, immune escape	Decreased immunosuppressive kynurenines by IDO
inhibitors	
Formamidase	Neurological diseases	Decreasing neurotoxic Kyn metabolites by
formamidase inhibition	
	Cancer and infections	Decreasing immunosuppressive Kyn metabolites
by formamidase inhibition	
KAT	Schizophrenia	Improved glutamatergic activity by KAT II
inhibition	
	Malaria infection	Decreasing XA by KAT inhibition	
KMO	anxiety, cerebral malaria, Inflammatory and
neurodegenerative diseases, pancreatitis	Decreased 3-HK, 3-HAA and QA and increased Kyn
and KA by KMO inhibitors	
Kynureninase	Neurodegenerative diseases	Decreased 3-HAA and QA formation by
kynureninase inhibition	
3-HAAO	Neurodegenerative diseases	Decreased QA formation by 3-HAAO
inhibition	
ACMSD	No definite views	Inhibition could be controversial	
QPRT	neurodegenerative
Diseases	Stimulation to lower QA	
	Cancer	Inhibition to decrease NAD+ to
undermine tumor viability	
		And suppression of cell death by inhibition of
caspase production	
NAD synthetase	Mycobacterium tuberculosis	Inhibition to limit NAD+
availability	
NMPRT	Cancer	Inhibition to suppress colorectal tumors	
NMNAT-NAMNAT	Neurological and neuro-degenerative
diseases	Activation to increase NAD+
synthesis to combat oxidative damage	
NNMT	Obesity, type 2 diabetes	Inhibition undermines processes related to
glucose metabolism and fat deposition	
NADase	Streptococcal virulence	Inhibition of NADase	
PARP	Cancer, stroke, myocardial infarction,
neurotrauma	Inhibition of PARP activity	
Abbreviations used: ACMSD (2-amino-3-carboxymuconic
acid-6-semialdehyde; also known as acroleyl aminofumarate), 3-HAA
(3-hydroxyanthranilic acid), 3-HAAO (3-hydroxyanthranilic acid
3,4-dioxygenase), 3-HK (3-hydroxykynurenine), IDO (indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase), KA (kynurenic acid), Kyn (kynurenine), KAT (kynurenine
aminotransferase), KMO (kynurenine monooxygenase or kynurenine hydroxylase),
α-MT (α-methyltryptophan), NAMNAT/NMNAT (nicotinamide
mononucleotide/nicotinic acid mononucleotide adenylyl transferases), NMPRT
(nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase), NNMT (nicotinamide
N-methyltransferase), PARP [poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase], QPRT (quinolinate
phosphoribosyltransferase), QA (quinolinic acid), Trp (tryptophan), TDO
(tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase), XA (xanthurenic acid).
==== Refs
[1] Amer MS  Abdel-Daim MH  Abdel-Tawab GA   Studies with tryptophan metabolites in vitro. Kynurenine
metabolism in kidneys of mice infested with Schistosoma
mansoni Biochemical Journal 1968 109 4 613 615 5683509 
[2] Kelada FS  Abdel-Tawab GA  Moustafa MH  Konbar AA   Comparative studies on the in vivo effects of tartar emetic,
vitamin B6, and the chelating agent 2,3-dimercaptopropanol (BAL) on the
functional capacity of the tryptophan-niacin pathway in patients with
schistosomiasis Metabolism 1972 21 12 1105 1112 4641954 
[3] Saad AA  Abdel-Tawab GA  El-Zoghiby SM  Mostafa MH  Moursi GE   Relationship between pyridoxal phosphate and some synthetic
oestrogens in their effect on kynurenine hydrolase and kynurenine
aminotransferase enzymes of normal mouse liver Biochemical Pharmacology 1974 23 5 999 1013 4458682 
[4] El-Zoghby SM  El-Sewedy SM  Saad AA  Mostafa MH  Ebied SM  Abdel-Tawab GA   In vitro Trials to counteract the inhibitory effect of
β-oestradiol and ethynyloestradiol on the B6-dependent kynurenine
aminotransferase enzyme Biochemical Pharmacology 1976 25 21 2411 2413 999732 
[5] Hayaishi O   My life with tryptophan—Never a dull
moment Protein Science 1993 2 3 472 475 8453383 
[6] Badawy AA-B   Kynurenine Pathway of Tryptophan Metabolism: Regulatory and
Functional Aspects International Journal of Tryptophan Research 2017 10 117864691769193 
[7] Bender DA   Biochemistry of tryptophan in health and disease Molecular Aspects of Medicine 1983 6 2 101 197 6371429 
[8] Badawy AA-B   Plasma free tryptophan revisited: What you need to know and do
before measuring it Journal of Psychopharmacology 2010 24 6 809 815 19074538 
[9] Morgan CJ  Badawy AA-B   Effects of storage on binding and stability of tryptophan in
human serum Annals of Clinical Biochemistry 1994 31 2 190 192 8060100 
[10] Denckla WD  Dewey HK   The determination of tryptophan in plasma, liver and
urine J Lab Clin Med 1967 69 160 169 6018066 
[11] Bloxam DL  Warren WH   Error in the determination of tryptophan by the method of Denckla
Dewey: a revised procedure Anal Biochem 1974 60 621 625 4844574 
[12] Badawy AA-B   Tryptophan metabolism, disposition and utilisation in
pregnancy Biosci Rep 2015 35 art 
[13] Badawy AA   Targeting tryptophan availability to tumors: the answer to immune
escape? Immunology & Cell Biology 2018 96 10 1026 1034 29888434 
[14] Carlsson A  Lindqvist M   Dependence of 5-HT and catecholamine synthesis on concentrations
of precursor amino-acids in rat brain Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Archives of Pharmacology 1978 303 2 157 164 
[15] Friedman PA  Kappelman AH  Kaufman S   Partial purification and characterization of tryptophan
hydroxylase from rabbit hindbrain The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1972 247 13 4165 4173 4402511 
[16] Grahame-Smith DG   Studies in vivo on the relationship between brain tryptophan,
brain 5-ht synthesis and hyperactivity in rats treated with a monoamine
oxidase inhibitor and L-tryptophan Journal of Neurochemistry 1971 18 6 1053 1066 4254940 
[17] Kaufman S   Properties of the Pterin-Dependent Aromatic Amino Acid
Hydroxylases Ciba Foundation Symposium 22 - Aromatic Amino Acids in the Brain.
Novartis Foundation Symposia John Wiley & Sons, Ltd Chichester, UK 1974 85 115 
[18] Badawy AA-B  Williams DL   Enhancement of rat brain catecholamine synthesis by
administration of small doses of tyrosine and evidence for substrate
inhibition of tyrosine hydroxylase activity by large doses of the amino
acid Biochemical Journal 1982 206 1 165 168 6127072 
[19] Gál EM  Young RB  Sherman AD   Tryptophan loading: consequent effects on the synthesis of
kynurenine and 5-hydroxyindoles in rat brain Journal of Neurochemistry 1978 31 1 237 244 307593 
[20] Young SN  Smith SE  Pihl RO  Ervin FR   Tryptophan depletion causes a rapid lowering of mood in normal
males Psychopharmacology 1985 87 2 173 177 3931142 
[21] Badawy AA-B  Dougherty DM  Richard DM   Specificity of the acute tryptophan and tyrosine plus
phenylalanine depletion and loading tests part II: Normalisation of the
tryptophan and the tyrosine plus phenylalanine to competing amino acid
ratios in a new control formulation International Journal of Tryptophan Research 2010 3 1 35 47 20725610 
[22] Robins E  Robins JM  Croninger AB  Moses SG  Spencer SJ  Hudgens RW   The low level of 5-hydroxytryptophan decarboxylase in human
brain Biochemical Medicine 1967 1 3 240 251 
[23] Hardeland R   Melatonin — More than Just a Pineal
Hormone Biomedical Journal of Scientific & Technical Research 2017 1 4 
[24] Chowdhyry I  Sengupta A  Maitra SK   Melatonin, 50 years of scientific journey from the discovery in
bovine pineal gland to delineation of functions in humans Indian J Biochem Biophys 2008 45 289 304 19069840 
[25] Tan D  Xu B  Zhou X  Reiter R   Pineal Calcification, Melatonin Production, Aging, Associated
Health Consequences and Rejuvenation of the Pineal Gland Molecules 2018 23 2 301 
[26] Bernard M  Guerlotté J  Grève P    Melatonin synthesis pathway: Circadian regulation of the genes
encoding the key enzymes in the chicken pineal gland and
retina Reproduction Nutrition Development 1999 39 3 325 334 
[27] Sánchez S  Sánchez CL  Paredes SD  Rodriguez AB  Barriga C   The effect of tryptophan administration on the circadian rhythms
of melatonin in plasma and the pineal gland of rats Journal of Applied Biomedicine 2008 6 4 177 186 
[28] Flamand V  Zhao H  Peehl DM   Targeting monoamine oxidase A in advanced prostate
cancer Journal of Cancer Research and Clinical Oncology 2010 136 11 1761 1771 20204405 
[29] Wu JB  Shao C  Li X    Monoamine oxidase A mediates prostate tumorigenesis and cancer
metastasis The Journal of Clinical Investigation 2014 124 7 2891 2908 24865426 
[30] Pisani L  Catto M  Leonetti F    Targeting monoamine oxidases with multipotent ligands: An
emerging strategy in the search of new drugs against neurodegenerative
diseases Current Medicinal Chemistry 2011 18 30 4568 4587 21864289 
[31] Singh Y  Swanson E  Sokoloski E  Krishnan Kutty R  Krishna G   MPTP and MPTP analogs induced cell death in cultured rat
hepatocytes involving the formation of pyridinium
metabolites Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 1988 96 2 347 359 3143167 
[32] McCrodden JM  Tipton KF  Sullivan JP   Minireview, The neurotoxicity of MPTP and the relevance to
Parkinsons disease Pharmacol Toxicol 1990 67 13 
[33] Torrente MP  Gelenberg AJ  Vrana KE   Boosting serotonin in the brain: Is it time to revamp the
treatment of depression? Journal of Psychopharmacology 2012 26 5 629 635 22158544 
[34] Badawy AA-B   Tryptophan: The key to boosting brain serotonin synthesis in
depressive Illness Journal of Psychopharmacology 2013 27 10 878 893 23904410 
[35] Badawy AA-B  Evans M   Tryptophan plus a pyrrolase inhibitor for
depression? The Lancet 1974 304 7890 1209 1210 
[36] Badawy AA-B  Evans M   Tryptophan plus a pyrrolase inhibitor for
depression The Lancet 1975 2 7940 869 
[37] Meltzer HY  Lowy MT   The serotonin hypothesis of depression Meltzer HY   Psychopharmacology: The Third Generation of Progress Raven Press New York 513 526 1987 Chapter 52 
[38] Waløen K  Kleppe R  Martinez A  Haavik J   Tyrosine and tryptophan hydroxylases as therapeutic targets in
human disease Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Targets 2017 21 2 167 180 27973928 
[39] Pagan C  Goubran-Botros H  Delorme R    Disruption of melatonin synthesis is associated with impaired
14-3-3 and miR-451 levels in patients with autism spectrum
disorders Scientific Reports 2017 7 1 
[40] Talib W   Melatonin and Cancer Hallmarks Molecules 2018 23 3 518 
[41] Tan D  Manchester L  Qin L  Reiter R   Melatonin: A Mitochondrial Targeting Molecule Involving
Mitochondrial Protection and Dynamics International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2016 17 12 2124 
[42] Khalil EM  De Angelis J  Ishii M  Cole PA   Mechanism-based inhibition of the melatonin rhythm enzyme:
Pharmacologic exploitation of active site functional
plasticity Proceedings of the National Acadamy of Sciences of the United States of
America 1999 96 22 12418 12423 
[43] Jones RSG   Tryptamine: a neuromodulator or neurotransmitter in mammalian
brain? Progress in Neurobiology 1982 19 1–2 117 139 6131482 
[44] Mousseau DD   Tryptamine: A metabolite of tryptophan implicated in various
neuropsychiatric disorders Metabolic Brain Disease 1993 8 1 1 44 8098507 
[45] Young SN  Lal S   CNS tryptamine metabolism in hepatic coma Journal of Neural Transmission 1980 47 3 153 161 7381453 
[46] Weissbach H  King W  Sjoerdsma A  Udenfriend S   Formation of indole-3-acetic acid and tryptamine in animals: a
method for estimation of indole-3-acetic acid in tissues The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1959 234 1 81 86 13610897 
[47] Young SN  St-Arnaud-McKenzie D  Sourkes TL   Importance of tryptophan pyrrolase and aromatic amino acid
decarboxylase in the catabolism of tryptophan Biochemical Pharmacology 1978 27 5 763 767 77669 
[48] Young SN  Anderson GM  Gauthier S  Purdy WC   The Origin of Indoleacetic Acid and Indolepropionic Acid in Rat
and Human Cerebrospinal Fluid Journal of Neurochemistry 1980 34 5 1087 1092 6154772 
[49] Williams BB  Van Benschoten AH  Cimermancic P    Discovery and characterization of gut microbiota decarboxylases
that can produce the neurotransmitter tryptamine Cell Host & Microbe 2014 16 4 495 503 25263219 
[50] Pacak K  Eisenhofer G  Carrasquillo JA  Chen CC  Li S-T  Goldstein DS   6-[18 F]fluorodopamine positron emission tomographic
(PET) scanning for diagnostic localization of
pheochromocytoma Hypertension 2001 38 1 6 8 11463751 
[51] Dragulska S  Kańska M   Enzymatic synthesis of tryptamine and its halogen derivatives
selectively labeled with hydrogen isotopes Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry 2014 299 1 759 763 26224955 
[52] Thierry FY  Monisola II  Berka NP  Derek NT   Biological applications of tryptamine Schiff base
derivatives Proceedings of the in. 9th Int’l Conference on Advances in
Science, Engineering, Technology Waste Management (ASETWM-17) Parys, South Africa 2017 
[53] Stanley JC  Nicholas AR  Dickson AJ  Thompson IM  Pogson CI   Tryptophan aminotransferase activity in rat liver Biochemical Journal 1984 220 1 341 344 6146313 
[54] BRENDA: the comprehensive enzyme information
system Choice Reviews Online 2002 39 11 39-6407 39-6407 
[55] Ramos-Chávez LA  Lugo Huitrón R  González Esquivel D    Relevance of Alternative Routes of Kynurenic Acid Production in
the Brain Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity 2018 2018 5272741 
[56] Berg CP  Rose WC  Marvel CS   Tryptophane and growth. III. 3-indolepropionic acid and
3-indolepyruvic acid as supplementing agents in diets deficient in
tryptophane The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1929 85 219 231 
[57] O’Neil SR  DeMoss RD   Tryptophan transaminase from Clostridium
sporogenes Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 1968 127 C 361 369 5697992 
[58] Richards P  Brown CL  Lowe SM   Synthesis of tryptophan from 3-indolepyruvic acid by a healthy
woman Journal of Nutrition 1972 102 11 1547 1549 5081686 
[59] Bacciottini L  Pellegrini-Giampietro DE  Bongianni F  de Luca G  Politi V  Moroni F   Biochemical and behavioural studies on indole-pyruvic acid: a
keto-analogue of tryptophan Pharmacological Research Communications 1987 19 11 803 817 2451257 
[60] Politi V  D’Alessio S  Di Stazio G  De Luca G   Antioxidant Properties of Indole-3-Pyruvic Acid Recent Advances in Tryptophan Research, vol. 398 of Advances in
Experimental Medicine and Biology Springer US Boston, MA 1996 291 298 
[61] Patent 3-Indolepyruvic acid derivatives and pharmaceutical use
thereof Proceedings of the PCT/IT88/00041. International publication number: WO
88/09789 15.12.88 Gazette 88/27 
[62] McGettrick AF  Corcoran SE  Barry PJ    Trypanosoma brucei metabolite indolepyruvate decreases
HIF-1α and glycolysis in macrophages as a mechanism of innate immune
evasion Proceedings of the National Acadamy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2016 113 48 E7778 E7787 
[63] Williams JN Jr  Feigelson P  Elvehjem CA   Relation of tryptophan and niacin to pyridine nucleotides of
tissue The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1950 187 2 597 604 14803441 
[64] Bender DA  Magboul BI  Wynick D   Probable mechanisms of regulation of the utilization of dietary
tryptophan, nicotinamide and nicotinic acid as precursors of nicotinamide
nucleotides in the rat British Journal of Nutrition 1982 48 1 119 127 6213259 
[65] Mccreanor GM   The metabolism of high intakes of tryptophan, nicotinamide and
nicotinic acid in the rat British Journal of Nutrition 1986 56 3 577 586 2960374 
[66] Horwitt MK  Harvey CC  Rothwell WS  Cutler JL  Haffron D   Tryptophan-Niacin Relationships in Man Journal of Nutrition 1956 60 Suppl. 1 1 43 13385712 
[67] Goldsmith GA   Niacin-tryptophan relationships in man and niacin
requirement American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 1958 6 5 479 486 13594872 
[68] Kanai M  Funakoshi H  Takahashi H    Tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase is a key modulator of physiological
neurogenesis and anxiety-related behavior in mice Molecular Brain 2009 2 1 article 8 
[69] Terakata M  Fukuwatari T  Kadota E    The niacin required for optimum growth can be synthesized from
L-tryptophan in growing mice lacking
tryptophan-2,3-dioxygenase Journal of Nutrition 2013 143 7 1046 1051 23700344 
[70] Santillan MK  Pelham CJ  Ketsawatsomkron P    Pregnant mice lacking indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase exhibit
preeclampsia phenotypes Physiological Reports 2015 3 1 e12257 25602015 
[71] Too LK  Li KM  Suarna C    Deletion of TDO2, IDO-1 and IDO-2 differentially affects mouse
behavior and cognitive function Behavioural Brain Research 2016 312 102 117 27316339 
[72] Cho-Chung YS  Pitot HC   Feedback control of rat liver tryptophan pyrrolase. I. End
product inhibition of trytophan pyrrolase activity The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1967 242 6 1192 1198 4381550 
[73] Badawy AA-B  Evans M   The regulation of rat liver tryptophan pyrrolase activity by
reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (phosphate). Experiments with
glucose and nicotinamide Biochemical Journal 1976 156 2 381 390 8041 
[74] Badawy AA-B   Tryptophan metabolism in alcoholism Nutrition Research Reviews 2002 15 1 123 152 19087401 
[75] Yoshida R  Nukiwa T  Watanabe Y  Fujiwara M  Hirata F  Hayaishi O   Regulation of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase activity in the small
intestine and the epididymis of mice Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 1980 203 1 343 351 6967714 
[76] Cook JS  Pogson CI  Smith SA   Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase. A new, rapid, sensitive radiometric
assay and its application to the study of the enzyme in rat
tissues Biochemical Journal 1980 189 3 461 466 6971096 
[77] Ozaki Y  Reinhard JF Jr  Nichol CA   Cofactor activity of dihydroflavin mononucleotide and
tetrahydrobiopterin for murine epididymal indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 1986 137 3 1106 1111 3488060 
[78] Efimov I  Basran J  Sun X    The mechanism of substrate inhibition in human indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase Journal of the American Chemical Society 2012 134 6 3034 3041 22299628 
[79] Pfefferkorn ER  Rebhun S  Eckel M   Characterization of an Indoleamine 2,3-Dioxygenase Induced by
Gamma-Interferon in Cultured Human Fibroblasts Journal of Interferon Research 1986 6 3 267 279 2427623 
[80] Ozaki Y  Edelstein MP  Duch DS   The actions of interferon and antiinflammatory agents on
induction of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase in human peripheral blood
monocytes Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 1987 144 3 1147 1153 3107562 
[81] Hucke C  MacKenzie CR  Adjogble KDZ  Takikawa O  Däubener W   Nitric Oxide-Mediated Regulation of Gamma Interferon-Induced
Bacteriostasis: Inhibition and Degradation of Human Indoleamine
2,3-Dioxygenase Infection and Immunity 2004 72 5 2723 2730 15102781 
[82] Thomas SR  Terentis AC  Cai H    Post-translational regulation of human indoleamine 2,
3-dioxygenase activity by nitric oxide The Journal of Biological Chemistry 2007 282 33 23778 23787 17535808 
[83] Badawy AA-B  Evans M   Animal liver tryptophan pyrrolases. Absence of apoenzyme and of
hormonal induction mechanism from species sensitive to tryptophan
toxicity Biochemical Journal 1976 158 1 79 88 962891 
[84] Ikeda M  Tsuji H  Nakamura S  Ichiyama A  Nishizuka Y  Hayaishi O   Studies on the biosynthesis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
II. A role of picolinic carboxylase in the biosynthesis of nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide from tryptophan in mammals The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1965 240 1395 1401 14284754 
[85] Allegri G  Bertazzo A  Biasiolo M  Costa CVL  Ragazzi E   Kynurenine pathway enzymes in different species of
animals Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 2003 527 455 463 15206763 
[86] Murakami Y  Saito K   Species and cell types difference in tryptophan
metabolism International Journal of Tryptophan Research 2013 6 1 47 54 
[87] Horita A  Carino MA   Modification of the toxic actions of L-tryptophan by pargyline
and p-chIorophenylalanine Biochemical Pharmacology 1970 19 4 1521 1524 4254781 
[88] Knox WE   The regulation of tryptophan pyrrolase activity by
tryptophan Advances in Enzyme Regulation 1966 4 C 287 297 4862944 
[89] Badawy AA-B   Tryptophan and inhibitors of tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase as
antidepressants: Reply Journal of Psychopharmacology 2013 28 2 169 172 
[90] Muñoz-Clares RA  Lloyd P  Lomax MA  Smith SA  Pogson CI   Tryptophan metabolism and its interaction with gluconeogenesis in
mammals: Studies with the guinea pig, mongolian gerbil, and
sheep Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 1981 209 2 713 717 7294822 
[91] Badawy AA-B  Evans M   Opposite effects of chronic administration and subsequent
withdrawal of drugs of dependence on the metabolism and disposition of
endogenous and exogenous tryptophan in the rat Alcohol and Alcoholism 1983 18 4 369 382 
[92] Werner ER  Fuchs D  Hausen A    Tryptophan Degradation in Patients Infected by Human
Immunodeficiency Virus Biological Chemistry Hoppe-Seyler 1988 369 1 337 340 3166737 
[93] Badawy AA-B   Central role of tryptophan pyrrolase in haem
metabolism Biochemical Society Transactions 1979 7 3 575 583 446865 
[94] Badawy AA-B  Morgan CJ   Tryptophan pyrrolase in haem regulation. The relationship between
the depletion of rat liver tryptophan pyrrolase haem and the enhancement of
5-aminolaevulinate synthase activity by
2-allyl-2-isopropylacetamide Biochemical Journal 1980 186 3 763 772 6446903 
[95] Morgan CJ  Badawy AA-B   Tryptophan pyrrolase in haem regulation. The mechanism of the
permissive effect of cortisol on the enhancement of 5-aminolaevulinate
synthase activity by 2-allyl-2-isopropylacetamide in the
adrenalectomized-rat liver Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 1980 32 3 993 996 
[96] Welch AN  Badawy AA-B   Tryptophan pyrrolase in haem regulation. Experiments with
administered haematin and the relationship between the haem saturation of
tryptophan pyrrolase and the activity of 5-aminolaevulinate synthase in rat
liver Biochemical Journal 1980 192 2 403 410 7236220 
[97] Badawy AA-B  Morgan CJ   Tryptophan and tryptophan pyrrolase in haem regulation. The role
of lipolysis and direct displacement of serum-protein-bound tryptophan in
the opposite effects of administration of endotoxin, morphine, palmitate,
salicylate and theophylline on rat liver 5-aminolaevulinate synthase
activity and the haem saturation of tryptophan pyrrolase Biochemical Journal 1982 206 3 451 460 7150256 
[98] Badawy AA-B   Heme utilization by rat liver tryptophan pyrrolase as a screening
test for exacerbation of hepatic porphyrias by drugs Journal of Pharmacological Methods 1981 6 2 77 85 6270470 
[99] Yamamoto S  Hayaishi O   Tryptophan pyrrolase of rabbit intestine. D- and
L-tryptophan-cleaving enzyme or enzymes The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1967 242 22 5260 5266 6065097 
[100] Takikawa O  Yoshida R  Kido R  Hayaishi O   Tryptophan degradation in mice initiated by indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1986 261 8 3648 3653 2419335 
[101] Yasui H  Takai K  Yoshida R  Hayaishi O   Interferon enhances tryptophan metabolism by inducing pulmonary
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase: Its possible occurrence in cancer
patients Proceedings of the National Acadamy of Sciences of the United States of
America 1986 83 17 6622 6626 
[102] Pfefferkorn ER  Rebhun S  Eckel M   Characterization of an Indoleamine 2,3-Dioxygenase Induced by
Gamma-Interferon in Cultured Human Fibroblasts Journal of Inter-feron Research 1986 6 3 267 279 
[103] Taylor MW  Feng G   Relationship between interferon-γ, indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase, and tryptophan catabolism The FASEB Journal 1991 5 11 2516 2522 1907934 
[104] Munn DH  Zhou M  Attwood JT    Prevention of allogeneic fetal rejection by tryptophan
catabolism Science 1998 281 5380 1191 1193 9712583 
[105] Badawy AA-B   Effects of pregnancy on tryptophan metabolism and disposition in
the rat Biochemical Journal 1988 255 1 369 372 3196323 
[106] Moffett JR  Namboodiri MA   Tryptophan and the immune response Immunology & Cell Biology 2003 81 4 247 265 12848846 
[107] Badawy AA-B   The tryptophan utilization concept in pregnancy Obstetrics & Gynecology Science 2014 57 4 249 25105097 
[108] Badawy AA-B   Tryptophan metabolism, disposition and utilization in
pregnancy Bioscience Reports 2015 35 5 e00261 e00261 26381576 
[109] Badawy AA-B  Namboodiri AMA  Moffett JR   The end of the road for the tryptophan depletion concept in
pregnancy and infection Clinical Science 2016 130 15 1327 1333 27358028 
[110] Heyliger SO  Mazzio EA  Soliman KFA   The anti-inflammatory effects of quinolinic acid in the
rat Life Sciences 1999 64 14 1177 1187 10210260 
[111] Terness P  Bauer TM  Röse L    Inhibition of allogeneic T cell proliferation by indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase–expressing dendritic cells: mediation of suppression
by tryptophan metabolites The Journal of Experimental Medicine 2002 196 4 447 457 12186837 
[112] Fallarino F  Grohmann U  Vacca C    T cell apoptosis by tryptophan catabolism Cell Death & Differentiation 2002 9 10 1069 1077 12232795 
[113] Badawy AA-B   Hypothesis kynurenic and quinolinic acids: The main players of
the kynurenine pathway and opponents in inflammatory disease Medical Hypotheses 2018 118 129 138 30037600 
[114] Moffett JR  Espey MG  Namboodiri MAA   Antibodies to quinolinic acid and the determination of its
cellular distribution within the rat immune system Cell & Tissue Research 1994 278 3 461 469 7850857 
[115] Nishizuka Y  Hayaishi O   Studies on the biosynthesis of nicotinamide adenine nucleotides
I. enzymatic synthesis of niacin ribonucleotides from 3-hydroxyanthranilic
acid in mammalian tissue The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1963 238 3369 3377 14085389 
[116] Bender DA   Inhibition in vitro of the enzymes of the oxidative pathway of
tryptophan metabolism and of nicotinamide nucleotide synthesis by
benserazide, carbidopa and isoniazid Biochemical Pharmacology 1980 29 5 707 712 20227944 
[117] Stone TW   The neuropharmacology of quinolinic and kynurenic
acids Pharmacological Reviews 1993 45 309 385 8248282 
[118] Darlington LG  Forrest CM  Mackay GM    On the biological importance of the 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid:
anthranilic acid ratio International Journal of Tryptophan Research 2010 3 1 51 59 22084587 
[119] Badawy AA-B  Bano S   Tryptophan Metabolism in Rat Liver after Administration of
Tryptophan, Kynurenine Metabolites, and Kynureninase
Inhibitors International Journal of Tryptophan Research 2016 9 p. IJTR.S38190 
[120] Smith SA  Carr FP  Pogson CI   The metabolism of L-tryptophan by isolated rat liver cells.
Quantification of the relative importance of, and the effect of nutritional
status on, the individual pathways of tryptophan metabolism Biochemical Journal 1980 192 2 673 686 7236232 
[121] Smith SA  Pogson CI   Tryptophan and the control of plasma glucose concentrations in
the rat Biochemical Journal 1977 168 3 495 506 147076 
[122] Reginaldo C  Jacques P  Scott T  Oxenkrug G  Selhub J  Paul L   Xanthurenic acid is associated with higher insulin resistance and
higher odds of diabetes FASEB J 2015 29 Supplement vol. 919.20 
[123] Ikeda S  Kotake Y   Urinary excretion of xanthurenic acid and zinc in diabetes: (3)
Occurrence of xanthurenic acid-Zn2+ complex in urine of diabetic patients
and of experimentally-diabetic rats Italian Journal of Biochemistry 1986 35 4 232 241 3781805 
[124] Oxenkrug GF   Increased plasma levels of xanthurenic and kynurenic acids in
type 2 diabetes Molecular Neurobiology 2015 52 2 805 810 26055228 
[125] Chausmer AB   Zinc, insulin, and diabetes Journal of the American College of Nutrition 1998 17 2 109 115 9550453 
[126] Zuwała-Jagiello J  Pazgan-Simon M  Simon K  Warwas M   Picolinic Acid in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis C Infection: A
Preliminary Report Mediators of Inflammation 2012 2012 10 Article ID 762863 
[127] Medana IM  Day NPJ  Salahifar-Sabet H    Metabolites of the kynurenine pathway of tryptophan metabolism in
the cerebrospinal fluid of Malawian children with malaria The Journal of Infectious Diseases 2003 188 6 844 849 12964115 
[128] Grant R  Coggan S  Smythe G   The Physiological Action of Picolinic Acid in the Human
Brain International Journal of Tryptophan Research 2009 2 p. IJTR.S2469 
[129] Billker O  Lindo V  Panico M    Identification of xanthurenic acid as the putative inducer of
malaria development in the mosquito Nature 1998 392 6673 289 292 9521324 
[130] Gobaille S  Kemmel V  Brumaru D  Dugave C  Aunis D  Maitre M   Xanthurenic acid distribution, transport, accumulation and
release in the rat brain Journal of Neurochemistry 2008 105 3 982 993 18182052 
[131] Badawy AA-B   Pellagra and alcoholism: A biochemical
perspective Alcohol and Alcoholism 2014 49 3 238 250 Article ID agu010 24627570 
[132] Badawy AA-B  Lake SL  Dougherty DM   Mechanisms of the Pellagragenic Effect of Leucine: Stimulation of
Hepatic Tryptophan Oxidation by Administration of Branched-Chain Amino Acids
to Healthy Human Volunteers and the Role of Plasma Free Tryptophan and Total
Kynurenines International Journal of Tryptophan Research 2014 7 23 32 25520560 
[133] Fukuwatari T  Shibata K   Nutritional aspect of tryptophan metabolism International Journal of Tryptophan Research 2013 6 1 3 8 23922498 
[134] Jacob RA  Swendseid ME  McKee RW  Fu CS  Clemens RA   Biochemical markers for assessment of niacin status in young men:
Urinary and blood levels of niacin metabolites Journal of Nutrition 1989 119 4 591 598 2522982 
[135] Shibata K  Matsuo H   Correlation between niacin equivalent intake and urinary
excretion of its metabolites, N’-methylnicotinamide,
N’-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide, and
N’-methyl-4-pyridone-3-carboxamide, in humans consuming a
self-selected food American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 1989 50 1 114 119 2526576 
[136] Bhutia YD  Babu E  Ramachandran S  Ganapathy V   Amino acid transporters in cancer and their relevance to
”glutamine addiction”: Novel Targets for the design of a new
class of anticancer drugs Cancer Research 2015 75 9 1782 1788 25855379 
[137] Bhutia YD  Babu E  Prasad PD  Ganapathy V   The amino acid transporter SLC6A14 in cancer and its potential
use in chemotherapy Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 2014 9 6 293 303 
[138] Karunakaran S  Umapathy NS  Thangaraju M    Interaction of tryptophan derivatives with SLC6A14
(ATB0,+ ) reveals the potential of the transporter as a drug
target for cancer chemotherapy Biochemical Journal 2008 414 3 343 355 18522536 
[139] Karunakaran S  Ramachandran S  Coothankandaswamy V    SLC6A14 (ATB0,+ ) protein, a highly concentrative and
broad specific amino acid transporter, is a novel and effective drug target
for treatment of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer The Journal of Biological Chemistry 2011 286 36 31830 31838 21771784 
[140] Timosenko E  Ghadbane H  Silk JD    Nutritional stress induced by tryptophan-degrading enzymes
results in ATF4-dependent reprogramming of the amino acid transporter
profile in tumor cells Cancer Research 2016 76 21 6193 6204 27651314 
[141] Kudo Y  Boyd CAR  Sargent IL  Redman CWG   Tryptophan degradation by human placental indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase regulates lymphocyte proliferation The Journal of Physiology 2001 535 1 207 215 11507170 
[142] Wang J  Simonavicius N  Wu X    Kynurenic acid as a ligand for orphan G protein-coupled receptor
GPR35 The Journal of Biological Chemistry 2006 281 31 22021 22028 16754668 
[143] Wirthgen E  Hoeflich A  Rebl A  Günther J   Kynurenic Acid: The Janus-Faced Role of an Immunomodulatory
Tryptophan Metabolite and Its Link to Pathological
Conditions Frontiers in Immunology 2018 8 
[144] Tiszlavicz Z  Németh B  Fülöp F    Different inhibitory effects of kynurenic acid and a novel
kynurenic acid analogue on tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)
production by mononuclear cells, HMGB1 production by monocytes and HNP1-3
secretion by neutrophils Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Archives of Pharmacology 2011 383 5 447 455 
[145] Rejdak R  Junemann A  Grieb P    Kynurenic acid and kynurenine aminotransferases in retinal aging
and neurodegeneration Pharmacological Reports 2011 63 6 1324 1334 22358081 
[146] Turski MP  Turska M  Paluszkiewicz P  Parada-Turska J  Oxenkrug GF   Kynurenic Acid in the digestive system—new facts, new
challenges International Journal of Tryptophan Research 2013 6 47 55 
[147] Forrest CM  Gould SR  Darlington LG  Stone TW   Levels of purine, kynurenine and lipid peroxidation products in
patients with inflammatory bowel disease Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 2003 527 395 400 15206756 
[148] Clarke G  Fitzgerald P  Cryan JF  Cassidy EM  Quigley EM  Dinan TG   Tryptophan degradation in irritable bowel syndrome: evidence of
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase activation in a male cohort BMC Gastroenterology 2009 9 1 article 6 
[149] Christmas DM  Badawy AA-B  Hince D    Increased serum free tryptophan in patients with
diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome Nutrition Research 2010 30 10 678 688 21056283 
[150] Julliard W  Fechner JH  Mezrich JD   The aryl hydrocarbon receptor meets immunology: Friend or foe? A
little of both Frontiers in Immunology 2014 5 
[151] Stevens EA  Mezrich JD  Bradfield CA   The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: A perspective on potential roles
in the immune system The Journal of Immunology 2009 127 3 299 311 
[152] DiNatale BC  Murray IA  Schroeder JC    Kynurenic acid is a potent endogenous aryl hydrocarbon receptor
ligand that synergistically induces interleukin-6 in the presence of
inflammatory signaling Toxicological Sciences 2010 115 1 89 97 20106948 
[153] García-Lara L  Pérez-Severiano F  González-Esquivel D  Elizondo G  Segovia J   Absence of aryl hydrocarbon receptors increases endogenous
kynurenic acid levels and protects mouse brain against excitotoxic insult
and oxidative stress Journal of Neuroscience Research 2015 93 9 1423 1433 26013807 
[154] Lanis JM  Alexeev EE  Curtis VF    Tryptophan metabolite activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
regulates IL-10 receptor expression on intestinal epithelia Mucosal Immunology 2017 10 5 1133 1144 28098246 
[155] van Baren N  Van den Eynde BJ   Tryptophan-degrading enzymes in tumoral immune
resistance Frontiers in Immunology 2015 6 1 9 article 34 25657648 
[156] Dolušić E  Frédérick R   Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase inhibitors: a patent review (2008
– 2012) Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Patents 2013 23 10 1367 1381 23992582 
[157] Moon YW  Hajjar J  Hwu P  Naing A   Targeting the indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase pathway in
cancer Journal for Immunotherapy of Cancer 2015 3 1 
[158] Weng T  Qiu X  Wang J  Li Z  Bian J   Recent discovery of indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase 1 inhibitors
targeting cancer immunotherapy European Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2018 143 656 669 29220788 
[159] Pantouris G  Mowat CG   Antitumour agents as inhibitors of tryptophan
2,3-dioxygenase Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 2014 443 1 28 31 24269239 
[160] Platten M  von Knebel Doeberitz N  Oezen I  Wick W  Ochs K   Cancer immunotherapy by targeting IDO1/TDO and their downstream
effectors Frontiers in Immunology 2015 5 article 673 
[161] Pilotte L  Larrieu P  Stroobant V    Reversal of tumoral immune resistance by inhibition of tryptophan
2,3-dioxygenase Proceedings of the National Acadamy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2012 109 7 2497 2502 
[162] Jacobs KR  Castellano-González G  Guillemin GJ  Lovejoy DB   Major developments in the design of inhibitors along the
kynurenine pathway Current Medicinal Chemistry 2017 24 23 2471 2495 28464785 
[163] Röhrig UF  Majjigapu SR  Vogel P  Zoete V  Michielin O   Challenges in the Discovery of Indoleamine 2,3-Dioxygenase 1
(IDO1) Inhibitors Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2015 58 24 9421 9437 25970480 
[164] Bailey CB  Wagner C   Kynurenine formamidase. Purification and characterization of the
adult chicken liver enzyme and immunochemical analyses of the enzyme of
developing chicks The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1974 249 14 4439 4444 4135584 
[165] Han Q  Robinson H  Li J   Biochemical identification and crystal structure of kynurenine
formamidase from Drosophila melanogaster Biochemical Journal 2012 446 2 253 260 22690733 
[166] Linderholm KR  Skogh E  Olsson SK    Increased levels of kynurenine and kynurenic acid in the CSF of
patients with schizophrenia Schizophrenia Bulletin 2012 38 3 426 432 20729465 
[167] Erhardt S  Schwieler L  Imbeault S  Engberg G   The kynurenine pathway in schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder Neuropharmacology 2017 112 297 306 27245499 
[168] Wu H-Q  Okuyama M  Kajii Y  Pocivavsek A  Bruno JP  Schwarcz R   Targeting kynurenine aminotransferase II in psychiatric diseases:
Promising effects of an orally active enzyme inhibitor Schizophrenia Bulletin 2014 40 2 S152 S158 24562494 
[169] Koshy Cherian A  Gritton H  Johnson DE  Young D  Kozak R  Sarter M   A systemically-available kynurenine aminotransferase II (KAT II)
inhibitor restores nicotine-evoked glutamatergic activity in the cortex of
rats Neuropharmacology 2014 82 41 48 24647121 
[170] Jayawickrama GS  Sadig RR  Sun G    Kynurenine aminotransferases and the prospects of inhibitors for
the treatment of schizophrenia Current Medicinal Chemistry 2015 22 24 2902 2918 26051411 
[171] Stone TW  Darlington LG   The kynurenine pathway as a therapeutic target in cognitive and
neurodegenerative disorders British Journal of Pharmacology 2013 169 6 1211 1227 23647169 
[172] Nematollahi A  Sun G  Jayawickrama G  Church W   Kynurenine Aminotransferase Isozyme Inhibitors: A
Review International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2016 17 6 946 
[173] Jayawickrama GS  Nematollahi A  Sun G  Church WB  Guillemin GJ   Improvement of kynurenine aminotransferase-II inhibitors guided
by mimicking sulfate esters PLoS ONE 2018 13 4 e0196404 29689093 
[174] Linderholm KR  Alm MT  Larsson MK    Inhibition of kynurenine aminotransferase II reduces activity of
midbrain dopamine neurons Neuropharmacology 2016 102 42 47 26514401 
[175] Shibata K  Marugami M  Kondo T   In vivo inhibition of kynurenine aminotransferase activity by
isonicotinic acid hydrazide in rats Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry 1996 60 5 874 876 
[176] Chouinard G  Annable L  Serrano M  Charette R   A controlled study of a dopa decarboxylase inhibitor
(benserazide) in the treatment of schizophrenic patients International Pharmacopsychiatry 1977 12 1 1 8 873714 
[177] Chouinard G  Annable L  Young SN  Sourkes TL   A controlled study of tryptophan-benserazide in
schizophrenia Communications in Psychopharmacology 1978 2 1 21 31 350483 
[178] Vilter RW   The Vitamin B6 -Hydrazide Relationship Vitamins & Hormones 1964 22 C 797 805 14284130 
[179] Jayawickrama GS  Nematollahi A  Sun G  Gorrell MD  Church WB   Inhibition of human kynurenine amino-transferase isozymes by
estrogen and its derivatives Scientific Reports 2017 7 1 
[180] Garcia GE  Wirtz RA  Barr JR  Woolfitt A  Rosenbergt R   Xanthurenic acid induces gametogenesis in Plasmodium, the malaria
parasite The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1998 273 20 12003 12005 9575140 
[181] Carpenedo R  Chiarugi A  Russi P    Inhibitors of kynurenine hydroxylase and kynureninase increase
cerebral formation of kynurenate and have sedative and anticonvulsant
activities Neuroscience 1994 61 2 237 244 7969905 
[182] Chiarugi A  Carpenedo R  Molina MT  Mattoli L  Pellicciari R  Moroni F   Comparison of the Neurochemical and Behavioral Effects Resulting
from the Inhibition of Kynurenine Hydroxylase and/or
Kynureninase Journal of Neurochemistry 1995 65 3 1176 1183 7643095 
[183] Chiarugi A  Carpenedo R  Moroni F   Kynurenine disposition in blood and brain of mice: Effects of
selective inhibitors of kynurenine hydroxylase and of
kynureninase Journal of Neurochemistry 1996 67 2 692 698 8764597 
[184] Clark CJ  Mackay GM  Smythe GA  Bustamante S  Stone TW  Phillips RS   Prolonged survival of a murine model of cerebral malaria by
kynurenine pathway inhibition Infection and Immunity 2005 73 8 5249 5251 16041050 
[185] Giorgini F  Huang S-Y  Sathyasaikumar KV    Targeted deletion of kynurenine 3-Monooxygenase in mice a new
tool for studying kynurenine pathway metabolism in periphery and
brain The Journal of Biological Chemistry 2013 288 51 36554 36566 24189070 
[186] Tufvesson-Alm M  Schwieler L  Schwarcz R  Goiny M  Erhardt S  Engberg G   Importance of kynurenine 3-monooxygenase for spontaneous firing
and pharmacological responses of midbrain dopamine neurons: Relevance for
schizophrenia Neuropharmacology 2018 138 130 139 29879409 
[187] Rojewska E  Piotrowska A  Makuch W  Przewlocka B  Mika J   Pharmacological kynurenine 3-monooxygenase enzyme inhibition
significantly reduces neuropathic pain in a rat model Neuropharmacology 2016 102 80 91 26524415 
[188] Zwilling D  Huang S-Y  Sathyasaikumar KV    Kynurenine 3-monooxygenase inhibition in blood ameliorates
neurodegeneration Cell 2011 145 6 863 874 21640374 
[189] Mole DJ  Webster SP  Uings I    Kynurenine-3-monooxygenase inhibition prevents multiple organ
failure in rodent models of acute pancreatitis Nature Medicine 2016 22 2 202 209 
[190] Smith JR  Jamie JF  Guillemin GJ   Kynurenine-3-monooxygenase: a review of structure, mechanism, and
inhibitors Drug Discovery Therapy 2016 21 2 315 324 
[191] Vescia A  Di Prisco G   Studies on purified 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid
oxidase The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1962 237 2318 2324 13925604 
[192] Jin H  Zhang Y  You H    Prognostic significance of kynurenine 3-monooxygenase and effects
on proliferation, migration and invasion of human hepatocellular
carcinoma Scientific Reports 2015 5 1 
[193] Liu C  Huang T  Lee C  Wang W  Lee H  Tseng L   Kynurenine-3-monooxygenase (KMO) protein promotes triple negative
breast cancer progression Annals of Oncology 2017 28 Suppl. 5 9P 
[194] Moroni F  Russi P  Gallo-Mezo MA  Moneti G  Pellicciari R   Modulation of Quinolinic and Kynurenic Acid Content in the Rat
Brain: Effects of Endotoxins and Nicotinylalanine Journal of Neurochemistry 1991 57 5 1630 1635 1833509 
[195] Schouten M   Strategy and Performance of Water Supply and Sanitation
Providers CRC Press 2009 
[196] Inhibitors of kynureninase WO1995011878A1 PCT/US94/12415, 196 Patent, Inhibitors of kynureninase. WO01A1.
PCT/US94/12415 1995 
[197] Van Greevenbroek MMJ  Vermeulen VMM-J  De Bruin TWA   Identification of novel molecular candidates for fatty liver in
the hyperlipidemic mouse model, HcB19 Journal of Lipid Research 2004 45 6 1148 1154 15060090 
[198] Wu W  Nicolazzo JA  Wen L    Expression of tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase and production of
kynurenine pathway metabolites in triple transgenic mice and human
Alzheimer’s disease brain PLoS ONE 2013 8 4 Article ID e59749 
[199] Pellicciari R  Liscio P  Giacchè N    α-Amino-β-carboxymuconate-Є-semialdehyde
Decarboxylase (ACMSD) Inhibitors as Novel Modulators of de Novo Nicotinamide
Adenine Dinucleotide (NAD+ ) Biosynthesis Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2018 61 3 745 759 
[200] Fukuwatari T  Ohsaki S  Fukuoka S-I  Sasaki R  Shibata K   Phthalate esters enhance quinolinate production by inhibiting
α-amino-β-carboxymuconate E-semialdehyde decarboxylase (ACMSD,
a key enzyme of the tryptophan pathway Toxicological Sciences 2004 81 2 302 308 15229365 
[201] Thirtamara-Rajamani K  Li P  Escobar Galvis ML  Labrie V  Brundin P  Brundin L   Is the Enzyme ACMSD a Novel Therapeutic Target in
Parkinson’s Disease? Journal of Parkinson’s Disease 2017 7 4 577 587 
[202] Rajamani KT  Krzyzanowski S  Escobar Galvis ML  Brundin P  Brundin L   840. Developing a Rodent Model of Depression and
Neurodegenerative Disease by Targeting ACMSD, a Key Enzyme in the Kynurenine
Pathway Biological Psychiatry 2017 81 10 S340 
[203] Srivastava S   Emerging therapeutic roles for NAD+  metabolism in
mitochondrial and age-related disorders linical and Translational Medicine 2016 5 1 article 25 
[204] Van Gool F  Gallí M  Gueydan C    Intracellular NAD levels regulate tumor necrosis factor protein
synthesis in a sirtuin-dependent manner Nature Medicine 2009 15 2 206 210 
[205] Frederick D  Loro E  Liu L    Loss of NAD homeostasis leads to progressive and reversible
degeneration of skeletal muscle Cell Metabolism 2016 24 2 269 282 27508874 
[206] Ishidoh K  Kamemura N  Imagawa T  Oda M  Sakurai J  Katunuma N   Quinolinate phosphoribosyl transferase, a key enzyme in de novo
NAD+  synthesis, suppresses spontaneous cell death by
inhibiting overproduction of active-caspase-3 Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell Research 2010 1803 5 527 533 20206212 
[207] Chuenchor W  Chang K  Doukov TI  Gerratana B   Structural and kinetic characterization of NAD Faseb J 25 Suppl 2011 10.1096/fasebj.25.1_supplement.963.4 
[208] Zhai RG  Rizzi M  Garavaglia S   Nicotinamide/nicotinic acid mononucleotide adenylyltransferase,
new insights into an ancient enzyme Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 2009 66 17 2805 2818 19448972 
[209] Verghese PB  Sasaki Y  Yang D    Nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyl transferase 1 protects
against acute neurodegeneration in developing CNS by inhibiting
excitotoxic-necrotic cell death Proceedings of the National Acadamy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2011 108 47 19054 19059 
[210] Tan B  Young DA  Lu Z    Pharmacological inhibition of nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), an enzyme essential for NAD+ 
biosynthesis, in human cancer cells: metabolic basis and potential clinical
implications The Journal of Biological Chemistry 2013 288 5 3500 3511 23239881 
[211] Zhang C  Tong J  Huang G   Nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase (Nampt) is a target of
microRNA-26b in colorectal cancer cells PLoS ONE 2013 8 7 Article ID e69963 
[212] Kraus D  Yang Q  Kong D    Nicotinamide N -methyltransferase knockdown
protects against diet-induced obesity Nature 2014 508 7495 258 262 24717514 
[213] Bricker AL  Carey VJ  Wessels MR   Role of NADase in virulence in experimental invasive group A
streptococcal infection Infection and Immunity 2005 73 10 6562 6566 16177331 
[214] Tatsuno I  Isaka M  Minami M  Hasegawa T   NADase as a target molecule of in vivo suppression of the
toxicity in the invasive M-1 group A Streptococcal isolates BMC Microbiology 2010 10 1 144 20470439 
[215] Wall KA  Klis M  Kornet J    Inhibition of the intrinsic NAD+  glycohydrolase
activity of CD38 by carbocyclic NAD analogues Biochemical Journal 1998 335 3 631 636 9794804 
[216] Morales JC  Li L  Fattah FJ    Review of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) mechanisms of
action and rationale for targeting in cancer and other
diseases Critical Reviews in Eukaryotic Gene Expression 2014 24 1 15 28 24579667 
[217] Curtin NJ  Szabo C   Therapeutic applications of PARP inhibitors: anticancer therapy
and beyond Molecular Aspects of Medicine 2013 34 6 1217 1256 23370117

