
==== Front
J Biol Chem
J Biol Chem
The Journal of Biological Chemistry
0021-9258
1083-351X
American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

S0021-9258(21)00299-4
10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100521
100521
JBC Reviews
RHO to the DOCK for GDP disembarking: Structural insights into the DOCK GTPase nucleotide exchange factors
Thompson Andrew P. 123
Bitsina Christina 123
Gray Janine L. 123
von Delft Frank 1345
Brennan Paul E. paul.brennan@cmd.ox.ac.uk
123∗
1 Nuffield Department of Medicine, Alzheimer’s Research UK Oxford Drug Discovery Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
2 Nuffield Department of Medicine, Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
3 Nuffield Department of Medicine, Centre for Medicines Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
4 Diamond Light Source, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot, United Kingdom
5 Department of Biochemistry, University of Johannesburg, Auckland Park, South Africa
∗ For correspondence: Paul E. Brennan paul.brennan@cmd.ox.ac.uk
05 3 2021
2021
05 3 2021
296 1005213 11 2020
4 3 2021
© 2021 The Authors
2021
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
The human dedicator of cytokinesis (DOCK) family consists of 11 structurally conserved proteins that serve as atypical RHO guanine nucleotide exchange factors (RHO GEFs). These regulatory proteins act as mediators in numerous cellular cascades that promote cytoskeletal remodeling, playing roles in various crucial processes such as differentiation, migration, polarization, and axon growth in neurons. At the molecular level, DOCK DHR2 domains facilitate nucleotide dissociation from small GTPases, a process that is otherwise too slow for rapid spatiotemporal control of cellular signaling. Here, we provide an overview of the biological and structural characteristics for the various DOCK proteins and describe how they differ from other RHO GEFs and between DOCK subfamilies. The expression of the family varies depending on cell or tissue type, and they are consequently implicated in a broad range of disease phenotypes, particularly in the brain. A growing body of available structural information reveals the mechanism by which the catalytic DHR2 domain elicits nucleotide dissociation and also indicates strategies for the discovery and design of high-affinity small-molecule inhibitors. Such compounds could serve as chemical probes to interrogate the cellular function and provide starting points for drug discovery of this important class of enzymes.

Keywords

dedicator of cytokinesis (DOCK)
guanine nucleotide exchange factor
guanosine triphosphate (GTP)
Ras homologous (RHO) small GTPases
cell signaling
structural biology
drug discovery
Abbreviations

AD, Alzheimer’s disease
aPKC, atypical protein kinase
APP, amyloid precursor protein
CDOCK, dedicator of cytokinesis
GDI, GDP dissociation inhibitor
GDP, guanosine diphosphate
GEF, guanine nucleotide exchange factor
GTP, guanosine triphosphate
MRCK, myotonic dystrophy kinase-related CDC42-binding kinase
PAK, p21-activated kinase
Edited by Henrik Dohlman
==== Body
GTPase function and regulation

The RAS superfamily of over 150 small GTPases is comprised of ∼20 kDa monomeric G-proteins, which are divided into five main families: RAS, RHO, RAN, RAB, and ARF based on structural and functional conservation (1, 2). The five families share the same basic biochemical function as binary molecular switches that affect a wide array of signaling cascades, eliciting cellular functions such as gene expression, protein and vesicle transport, and cytoskeletal remodeling (3, 4, 5). The latter of these is the most well-known function of the RAS-homologous (RHO) GTPase family. Through organization of actin structures in the cell, RHO GTPase-controlled signaling pathways dictate cellular motility and proliferation. Such signaling cascades are modulated through RHO GTPase effector families, examples of which include the atypical protein kinase Cs (aPKCs), myotonic dystrophy kinase-related CDC42-binding kinases (MRCKs), p21-activated kinases (PAKs), and RHO-associated protein kinases (ROCKs) (5). GTPases are referred to as binary molecular switches as they cycle between an active, guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-bound state and an inactive, guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-bound state (6). In the active state, GTPase signaling is conferred by conformational changes within the switch 1 and 2 loops (Fig. 1A), which dictate binding to effector proteins (7). Transition between these states is caused by hydrolysis of GTP to form GDP and dissociation of GDP to allow a new GTP molecule to bind. The affinity of the interaction between GTPases and either guanine nucleotides is extremely high (Kd 10−7–10−11) ensuring that these are committed states that do not spontaneously interchange; they do not respond to changes in cellular nucleotide concentrations (8). Rather, due to the intrinsically low GTPase activity of G-proteins, regulatory proteins are required for spatiotemporal control of the transition between active and inactive states (Fig. 1B). These regulatory proteins are therefore critical regulators of subsequent signaling cascades, ensuring that they occur at certain cellular and subcellular locations and at appropriate times in response to environmental stimuli. There are three categories of GTPase regulating molecules: guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), which are responsible for facilitating GDP dissociation, allowing subsequent GTP loading; GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) that stimulate GTP hydrolysis to result in an inactive, GDP bound GTPase; and GDP dissociation inhibitors (GDIs), which act only on the RHO and RAB subfamilies to maintain an inactive GTPase state in the cytoplasm (6). The localized modulation of GTPases by these mediators varies between cell types and thus constitutes a complex network of regulatory mechanisms (9). In particular, GEF-catalyzed nucleotide exchange results in an active GTPase that can transduce signals to control cellular functions (10). As evidenced by reports of small molecules targeting the RAS GEF SOS1, inhibition of GEF activity would thus arrest the given GTPase signaling pathways, constituting a promising target for small-molecule therapeutic development (11, 12).Figure 1 A, RHO family small GTPase RAC1 (pink surface, cartoon; PDB ID: 3TH5) bound to phosphoaminophosphonic acid–guanylate ester (GDPNP; green sticks) and magnesium (green sphere). The phosphate-binding loop (P-loop; red ribbon; residues 10–17) binds the phosphates of guanosine polyphosphates and magnesium. Switch loops 1 and 2 (yellow and green ribbons; residues 27–40, 57–74 respectively) change conformation depending on the presence of GDP or GTP to affect cellular signaling. B, GTPases (pink) cycle between an inactive, GDP-bound state to an active, GTP-bound state. The switch loop conformations in the active state allow GTPases to bind to and elicit cellular signaling processes. GDP dissociation is prevented by guanosine dissociation inhibitors (GDIs, orange) and accelerated by guanosine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs, blue), while GTP hydrolysis is induced by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). Together these interactions tightly control the location and timing of GTPase activity. Figure created with BioRender.com.

Disease associations of the RHO GTPase family

Due to their pleiotropic nature, aberrant signaling activity of GTPases has been associated with many disease phenotypes. This is best demonstrated by the observation that RAS proto-oncogenes HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS are mutated in almost 30% of human cancer types (13, 14, 15, 16). However, overactivation of the RHO subfamily such as RAS-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 (RAC1) and cell division cycle 42 homolog (CDC42) are also known to promote the hyperactivation of critical signaling cascades leading to cancer (10, 13, 17). In mammals, the RHO family consists of 20 members in total, further distributed into eight subfamilies based on sequence homology: CDC42, RAC, RHO, RHOBTB, RHOD/F, RHOH, RHOU/V, and RND (9). Among the RHO molecular switches, RAC1, CDC42, and RHOA are the most well defined and characterized (18, 19). Further investigation into the remaining RHO GTPases is required to determine the homeostatic and disease associations of this crucial protein family.

RHO GTPases also modulate neuronal functions, as evidenced by the implication of their dysregulation in neurological disorders. By coordinating actin cytoskeletal rearrangements (20, 21, 22), RHO GTPases elicit cellular adhesion and migration activities in neural tissues, regulating neuronal morphogenesis (18, 23, 24) and dendrite elaboration (25, 26) by participating in several signal transduction pathways through downstream effectors such as neuronal Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein (N-WASP) (26, 27). Improper regulation in these signaling cascades disrupts homeostasis, possibly leading to neurodegeneration (16, 28). This can be inferred from mouse primary hippocampal neuronal experiments, where RAC1 inhibition with compound NSC23766 leads to attenuated γ-secretase activity, resulting in a reduction in cellular amyloid precursor protein (APP) and subsequent β-amyloid plaque formation, a hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (29). Mounting evidence also connects RHOA, RAC1, and CDC42 to AD phenotypes such as synaptic dysfunction, dendritic spine loss, cytoskeletal abnormalities, and cell cycle re-entry (16). Similarly, emerging evidence supports that deregulation of RHO GTPase signaling has a significant impact toward the development of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) (23). Considering the growing body of RHO GTPase disease associations, further exploration into the cellular and molecular modulation of RHO GTPases is warranted.

DH and DOCK RHOGEFs

RHO GTPases can be activated by two distinct classes of GEFs: the Dbl homology (DH) domain containing enzymes and the dedicators of cytokinesis (DOCK). DH GEFs constitute the larger of the two classes, with over 70 members (30, 31). The eponymous domain is often associated with a pleckstrin homology (PH) domain, forming the DH/PH domain architecture that confers GEF activity. In contrast, there are only 11 DOCK proteins, and they are characterized by two structurally conserved domains: DOCK homology regions 1 and 2 (DHR1, DHR2) instead of the canonical DH/PH domain structure of the larger RHO GEF family.

The DHR1 domain is a C2-like domain that binds phospholipids to target DOCK complexes to the membrane, such as at a leading cellular edge where signaling can be initiated to drive motility (32). The DHR2 domain is responsible for GEF activity in a mechanism that is distinct from that of DH-containing GEFs (33, 34, 35). Based on sequence homology, phylogeny, and substrate specificity, the DOCK family is classified into four subfamilies: DOCK-A (DOCK1, 2, 5), DOCK-B (DOCK3, 4), DOCK-C (DOCK6, 7, 8), and DOCK-D (DOCK9, 10, 11) (Fig. 2). Generally DOCK families A and B contain N-terminal SRC Homology 3 (SH3) domains and a C-terminal proline-rich region that bind each other to maintain the protein in an autoinhibited state, an interaction that is alleviated upon binding adaptor proteins such as engulfment and cell motility protein 1 (ELMO1) (36, 37). Crystallographic and NMR studies on recombinant domains of these proteins culminated in a hypothetical model of the overall DOCK2-RAC1-ELMO1 signaling complex. A recent cryo-electron microscopy-derived structure of this signaling complex using the full-length proteins is consistent with these predictions and provides the first high-resolution view of the conformational and phosphorylation events leading to activation of the complete complex (Fig. 3) (38). The region interjoining the DHR1 and 2 domains has been identified as a series of armadillo (ARM) and Huntington, Elongation Factor 3, PR65/A, TOR (HEAT) repeats in DOCK2, termed the DOCK2-ARM region. Structural prediction indicates that this region is structurally conserved throughout the DOCK family, based on similarity to the aforementioned cryo-EM structure of DOCK2, RAC1, and ELMO1 (summarized in Fig. 2B; structural prediction performed in HHpred server) (39). An additional C2 domain N-terminally adjacent and in addition to the DHR1 was also observed in DOCK2 in this structure. Structural prediction indicates that this observed region N terminal to the DHR1 domain is conserved in the DOCK-A and B subfamilies, but differs within the C and D proteins (Fig. 2B) (39). Unlike the DOCK-A and B proteins, DOCK-C and D members do not contain the SH3 domain and therefore do not bind the ELMO1 adapter. There are no reports of DOCK-C and D family members interacting with such adapters to alleviate autoinhibition; however, multiple interacting partners have been observed for other members of the DOCK family, activating them in other ways such as via dephosphorylation (40). Uniquely, the DOCK-D proteins contain a PH domain, which, similarly to the DHR1 domain, is involved in membrane localization through phospholipid binding (34).Figure 2 A, DOCK proteins are largely classified into their subfamilies based on phylogeny, as well as sequence and substrate specificity. DOCK proteins with publicly available structural information are indicated by a circle. B, domain architecture of the DOCK proteins also follows their subfamilial categorization. All DOCK proteins contain a DHR1 as well as the catalytic DHR2 domain. Domains and numbering for the DOCK-A and B are based on the recently published Cryo-EM structure of the full-length DOCK2. The ARM repeat is putatively present in all DOCK proteins based on structural homology prediction. Domain numbering is represented by DOCK6 and 9 for DOCK-C and D subfamilies respectively. The domain architecture for Kalirin is provided as an example Dbl-Homology GEF. Kalirin is truncated for clarity of comparison (represented by dashed line). The canonical DH/PH architecture present twice in Kalirin confers its GEF activities.

Figure 3 A, cryo-EM structure of the autoinhibited DOCK2-ELMO1 complex (PDB ID: 6TGC). The DOCK2 (monomer depicted by transparent blue highlight) GTPase-binding site is occupied by ELMO1 (yellow). B, cryo-EM structure of the active DOCK2-ELMO-RAC1 complex (PDB ID: 6TGC). DOCK2 dimerizes through the DHR2 domain (blue), which also binds RAC1 (pink). ELMO1 binds to the SH3, Helical (Hel, black), C2 (green), and DHR2 domains, as well as the C-terminal pro-rich sequence (not depicted). ELMO1 undergoes conformational change upon relief of the autoinhibitory state depicted in panel A. C, the entire complex is localized to the membrane through the phospholipid-binding capabilities of the DOCK2 DHR1 and C2 domains. Complex is rotated 90 degrees out of the page with respect to B.

GTPase substrate specificities are broadly distinct in DOCK subfamilies. Substrate binding is conferred by specific residues within the DHR2 domain (41, 42). Generally, DOCK-A and DOCK-B proteins activate the RAC GTPases specifically (35, 41), whereas the DOCK-D subfamily is responsible for activating CDC42. The DOCK-C subfamily has dual binding capability, activating both CDC42 and RAC1, except for DOCK8, which appears to be a specific CDC42 GEF (38). DOCK10 also appears to bind more than one GTPase as evidenced by recent crystal structures in complex with CDC42 and RAC3 (Table 1) (42, 43, 44). However, as research has mainly focused on the RHO GTPases RAC1 and CDC42, there may indeed be uncharacterized alternate substrates for the DOCK GEFs among the full complement of 20 RHO GTPases. As regulators of the pleiotropic RHO GTPases, DOCK GEFs exhibit varying biological function associations, cell-type expression profiles, and subcellular localization as discussed below.Table 1 Available structural information for DOCK proteins

Dock protein	Dock domain	Partner protein	Ligand	PDB ID	Reference	
DOCK1	DHR1			3L4C	Premkumar, L. et al. (32)	
	SH3			2M0Y (NMR)	Liu, X. et al. (138)	
DOCK2	DHR2	RAC1		2YIN	Kulkarni, K. et al. (41)	
	DHR2	RAC1 (T17N mutant)		3B13	Hanawa-Suetsugu, K. et al. (37)	
	SH3 peptide	ELMO1 peptide		2RQR (NMR)	Hanawa-Suetsugu, K. et al. (37)	
	SH3	ELMO1		3A98	Hanawa-Suetsugu, K. et al. (37)	
	Full length	ELMO1		6TGB (Cryo-EM)	Chang, L. et al. (38)	
	Full length	RAC1, ELMO1		6TGC (Cryo-EM)	Chang, L. et al. (38)	
DOCK7	DHR2	CDC42		6AJ4	Kukimoto-Niino, M. et al. (42)	
	DHR2 (I1836Y Mutant)	CDC42		6AJL	Kukimoto-Niino, M. et al. (42)	
DOCK8 (MUS MUSCULUS)	DHR2	CDC42 (T17N Mutant)		3VHL	Harada, Y. et al. (113)	
DOCK9	PH			1WG7 (NMR)	Suetake, T. to be published	
	DHR2	CDC42		2WM9	Yang, J. et al. (35)	
	DHR2	CDC42	GDP	2WMN	Yang, J. et al. (35)	
	DHR2	CDC42	GTP	2WMO	Yang, J. et al. (35)	
DOCK10	DHR2	RAC3		6TM1	To be published	
	DHR2	CDC42		6TKY	To be published	
	DHR2	CDC42	GDP	6TKZ	To be published	

Biological function and disease associations of the DOCK GEFs

DOCK proteins control the spatiotemporal nature by which RHO GTPase signaling pathways occur. Therefore, the expression profiles and subcellular localization data reported in the literature and available on the Human Protein Atlas help explain the specific roles that each DOCK protein carries out (45, 46, 47). DOCK family functions in specific areas such as neurology (36, 48), immunology (49, 50), and cancer (17) have been extensively reviewed, and what follows is a summary of DOCK function with a focus on disease association of each family member (Table 2).Table 2 Human DOCK RHO GEF protein family members

Protein	Tissue expressiona	Subcellular localizationa,b	Cellular function	Disease associations	Uniprot ID	
DOCK1	Ubiquitous, elevated in brain, endocrine	N	Phagocytosis, migration	Metastasis in cancer	Q14185	
DOCK2	Blood, bone marrow and lymphoid	C	Immune survival and migration	Immunodeficiency, Alzheimer’s disease	Q92608	
DOCK3	Predominantly brain	C	Neuronal outgrowth	Developmental and motor disorders, Alzheimer’s disease	Q8IZD9	
DOCK4	Brain, lung	N, C, P	Axon-dendrite polarity, migration	Autism, dyslexia, schizophrenia, metastasis in cancer	Q8N1I0	
DOCK5	Predominantly in brain, lung and bone	C	Microtubule dynamics	Osteolysis	Q9H7D0	
DOCK6	Ubiquitous	C	Actin remodeling, axon growth in CNS	Adams-Oliver syndrome, metastasis	Q96HP0	
DOCK7	Brain, endocrine tissue, muscle, kidney	C	Axon formation, myelination	Glioblastoma, epileptic encephalopathy	Q96N67	
DOCK8	Bone marrow, lymphoid tissue and blood	N, C	Immune survival and migration	Immunodeficiency, multiple sclerosis	Q8NF50	
DOCK9	Ubiquitous	-	Neuronal synaptic plasticity	Papillary thyroid carcinoma	Q9BZ29	
DOCK10	Brain, bone marrow, lymphoid tissue and blood	N, C	Innate cell growth and differentiation	Leukemia, multiple sclerosis, aging	Q96BY6	
DOCK11	Bone marrow, lymphoid, adipose, female reproductive tissue	N	Filopodia formation, B cell signaling	Aging	Q5JSL3	
a Data from Human Protein Atlas (https://www.proteinatlas.org).

b Nuclear (N) or Cytoplasmic (C) or Plasma membrane (P).

DOCK1 (DOCK180)

DOCK1 is a GEF specific to the RAC subfamily of RHO GTPases. It is ubiquitously expressed, with elevated levels noted in the brain, endocrine, and epidermal tissues based on RNA expression provided in the Human Protein Atlas database, while protein expression data indicates higher levels in endocrine, female reproductive tissues, and lymphoid tissue. It has reported roles in cell migration, invasion, and phagocytosis (48, 51, 52, 53, 54). As has been demonstrated for several DOCK-A and B family proteins, DOCK1 autoinhibition is alleviated upon interaction with the ELMO adaptor proteins via the N-terminal SH3 domain, creating a complex that activates the RACs (36). DOCK1-mediated activation of RAC1 induces membrane ruffling, a formation of the motile cell surface consisting of actin filaments (55, 56). It has been reported that DOCK1 activity is crucial for migration in certain breast cancer cell lines, indicating that it is a potential target for general prevention of metastasis (51, 57). However, DOCK1 mutant zebrafish Schwann cells experienced developmental defects and myelination activities, indicating that DOCK1 is an important nervous system factor (58). While the ubiquitous expression of DOCK1, as well as its apparent importance to neural cell development, could pose problems when targeting tissue-specific disorders, inhibition of this GEF could have beneficial effects in cancer treatment.

DOCK2 (KIAA0209)

DOCK2, responsible for activating RAC GTPases, is predominantly expressed in hematopoietic cells (59, 60, 61, 62). It is a crucial regulator of the immune system, controlling the activation of both adaptive and innate immune cells (50, 61, 63). This is illustrated in animal models, wherein genetic ablation of DOCK2 decreased the migration speed of T-cells and B-cells in lymphoid tissue (61). Multiple immunodeficiencies have also been linked to DOCK2 mutations (64). In the brain DOCK2 is exclusively expressed in microglia and has been identified as a biomarker of this cell type, as it is a molecular hub influencing both homeostatic and neural disease processes (65). It has been implicated in the pathogenesis of AD by enhancing amyloid beta (Aβ) plaque formation (66, 67). DOCK2 is consequently an interesting target for potential Alzheimer’s therapeutics. At the molecular level, DOCK2 translocation to the inner membrane surface leads to GTPase activation to signal for subsequent migration and differentiation. As previously mentioned, complexes of ELMO1 and DOCK2 with and without RAC1 were solved, providing further insight into this mechanism (Fig. 3) (38). Interactions of ELMO1 with RHOG and brain-specific angiogenesis G-protein-coupled receptors (BAI GPCRs), as well as phosphorylation of ELMO1 and DOCK2, lead to GEF activation. This insight may also be applicable to structurally conserved members of DOCK-A and B subfamilies. As a regulator of cell motility that is predominantly found in immune cells, DOCK2 is a promising target for anti-inflammation therapeutics. As highlighted above, an application of this could be in the treatment of AD, where there is a growing body of evidence implicating microglia in the progression of AD (68).

DOCK3 (KIAA0299, modifier of cell adhesion, MOCA; presenilin-binding protein, PBP)

DOCK3, a GEF for RAC1, acts as regulator of actin reorganization in neuronal tissue (69, 70, 71, 72). DOCK3 participates in axonal and neurite outgrowth processes, particularly during early developmental stages via distinct signaling cascades that involve either the brain-derived neurotrophic factor-tyrosine kinase B (BDNF-TRKB)-mediated pathway or glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) (36, 69, 73, 74). DOCK3 gene variants leading to potentially nonfunctional protein were identified to cause developmental and motor issues in patients confirmed by a RAC1 pull-down assay and protein modeling (70). As indicated by its initial name, PBP, DOCK3 interacts with presenilin 1 (PS1), a catalytic unit of the γ-secretase proteolytic complex, which is responsible for processing amyloid precursor protein (APP) and subsequent formation and accumulation of β plaques (75, 76, 77, 78, 79). In vitro experiments have shown that induced expression of DOCK3 results in attenuated Aβ secretion through regulation of APP degradation (80, 81). The implications of the interaction between DOCK3 and PS1 in terms of AD progression are not fully understood and require further investigation. However, these findings highlight the role of DOCK3 in APP processing and axonal growth and the potential for modulating DOCK3-dependent signaling in the treatment for neurodegeneration.

DOCK4 (KIAA07016)

DOCK4 activates RAC and RAP1 GTPases (82). The Human Protein Atlas RNA database indicates predominant expression in the brain and lung tissue, with low-to-moderate levels elsewhere. Signaling through DOCK4 and its partner GTPases controls cytoskeletal and morphological processes such as neuronal branching, polarization, and outgrowth as well as motility and invasion. Knockdown of DOCK4 with shRNA eliminates dendritic growth and branching in hippocampal neurons (83). DOCK4 variants leading to reduced GEF activity and subsequent deficits in neuronal morphology have been linked to neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism, dyslexia, and schizophrenia (84, 85). Indeed, DOCK4 polymorphism has been identified as a risk factor for these disorders in genetic studies (86, 87). The SH3 domain is crucial for the aforementioned neural processes. While the C-terminal proline-rich region is not essential for its regulating its catalytic activity, it has been reported to play a role in synaptic localization and mediating the interaction with the actin-binding protein cortactin (36, 84). Upregulation of DOCK4 expression was recently identified in placenta accreta spectrum, wherein cells are detrimentally hyperinvasive (88). DOCK4 is posited as a potential biomarker for invasion characteristics in breast cancer (89). Finally, DOCK4 was recently shown to contribute to low-density lipoprotein transport, a causative process in atherosclerosis progression (90).While these disease indications are promising in the treatment of invasive cancers or cardiovascular disease, the crucial role that DOCK4 plays in neural development implies that there is a delicate balance for homeostatic DOCK4 activity.

DOCK5

DOCK5, one of the least studied family members, preferentially activates RAC1 over other RHO or RAC GTPases (91). It is predominantly present in the brain, lung, and bone tissues such as osteoclasts, but is also present in other tissues (92). One such tissue is the liver, where DOCK5 activity increases energy expenditure and insulin signaling by impeding mammalian target of rapamycin complex (mTORC1), linking DOCK5 downregulation to obesity (93). DOCK5-deficient mice, while otherwise healthy, were characterized by significantly increased bone mass, a classical symptom of improper bone resorption (94). This highlights DOCK5 as a potential target for inhibition to treat osteolytic diseases. In neurology, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified this gene as a high-risk genetic factor associated with familial Parkinson's disease (PD) pathology (95). Finally, a recent study identified a link between a family with bipolar disorder and a novel DOCK5 mutation (96). The studies highlighted here constitute the basis for investigating the role of DOCK5 in multiple processes, including insulin signaling, bone homeostasis, and psychiatric disorders. Notably, DOCK5 activity in bone homeostasis appears to be unique to this family member; however, further research is required to determine the potential for therapeutically targeting DOCK5.

DOCK6 (KIAA1395, ZIR1)

DOCK6 is reported to interact with both CDC42 and RAC1 (but not RHOA) in order to regulate actin remodeling, manifesting as neuron growth and regeneration in the brain (40, 43). Protein and RNA have been identified in the brain, endocrine, lung, gastrointestinal tract, liver and gall bladder, pancreas, kidney, reproductive tissues, adipose, and skin. Interestingly, DOCK6 preferentially activates RAC1 in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons (36) despite the fact that it has been predicted to bind to CDC42 with higher affinity, suggesting that further investigation of this dual binding mode is required (97). Neuronal axon branching and extension are dependent on the phosphorylation state of DOCK6. Dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) at Ser1194 activates GEF activity, resulting in axonal growth, whereas phosphorylation by AKT inactivates DOCK6 and causes branching to occur preferentially, as well as preventing axon regeneration (40). Four independent studies have identified mutations in the DOCK6 gene responsible for or associated with the development of the rare Adams–Oliver Syndrome (98, 99, 100, 101). Some of the observed mutations lead to the production of truncated DOCK6 proteins lacking the catalytic domains, while other mutations lead to point mutations in conserved residues (for example: V263D, E1052K). DOCK6 mutations are also associated with microcephaly, indicating that the protein may have a functional role during early development stages in the brain (69). As is commonly observed with DOCK proteins, DOCK6 expression correlates with proinvasion characteristics in a proteomic analysis of gastric cancer, suggesting that it may be a useful biomarker for tumor progression (102). It has also been demonstrated to promote resistance to chemotherapeutics and radiotherapy in gastric cancer (103). Similarly to DOCK1, DOCK6 inhibition could be antimetastatic, but targeting DOCK6 for therapeutic means may lead to off-target effects due to the high levels of DOCK6 expression throughout the body, as well as its clear role in neuronal functions.

DOCK7 (KIAA1771, ZIR2)

DOCK7 exhibits dual specificity for RAC and CDC42 GTPases, with a slight catalytic preference for CDC42 (42). It is highly expressed in the brain, where it has roles in axon formation, polarity, and myelination (42, 48, 104, 105). It is also expressed widely throughout the body, with high levels noted in endocrine, eye, and reproductive tissues according to RNA expression data (Human Protein Atlas). A region of DOCK7 that includes the DHR1 was identified to bind the centrosome-associated protein TACC3, an interaction that was required for neural genesis and nuclear migration (106). More recently a role for DOCK7 in the migration of neuroblasts in developing mouse brains was also identified (107). DOCK7-controlled migration can also be pathological; it was identified to be required for human hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-induced glioblastoma tumor cell invasion, with upregulated DOCK7 found in astrocytoma human glioblastoma compared with nonneoplastic brain (108). Interestingly, DOCK7 activity leads to migration in Schwann cells, and knocking down expression leads to increased myelination and differentiation (109). In keeping with observations that DOCK7 is crucial for neural processes, several studies have identified pathological links between premature stop codon mutations in DOCK7 that resulted in truncated protein and epileptic encephalopathy and cortical blindness (110, 111, 112). The majority of DOCK7 research has focused on its neural functions, despite its ubiquitous expression. Due to the recurring cytoskeletal remodeling and migratory capabilities, it can be hypothesized that DOCK7 will participate in similar processes in other cell types.

DOCK8 (ZIR8)

DOCK8 is a CDC42-specific GEF (113). It is predominantly observed in the blood, bone marrow, and lymphoid tissues by RNA, while protein expression also indicates high levels in the lung and lower levels in other tissues (Human Protein Atlas). DOCK8 regulates a broad range of signaling cascades to control survival, motility, and synapse formation in lymphocytes; it is required for B-cell, T-cell, and natural killer cell function (114). In line with this, patients with large deletions in the DOCK8 gene experience increased susceptibility to pathogenic infections yet also exhibit allergic diseases, leading to great interest surrounding DOCK8 in the field of immunology, which has recently been reviewed in great detail (50, 115, 116). Recently, it has been shown that DOCK8 knockout in mononuclear phagocytes renders them highly susceptible to cell death when migrating through tissue, releasing inflammatory cytokines in the process (117). In the brain, DOCK8 deficiency leads to impaired activity of T-cells and microglia, with studies showing that impaired GEF activity results in ameliorated outcomes of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model for multiple sclerosis (MS) (118, 119). Mutations in the DOCK8 gene have also been associated with autism disorders (116). Altogether, these findings demonstrate that, similarly to DOCK2, DOCK8 is a key element in the immune system. The potential for modulation of this protein in the treatment of MS is promising; however, potential immunodeficiencies will need to be considered.

DOCK9 (KIAA1058, Zizimin-1, ZIZ1)

The DOCK-D subfamily, although not as well studied as other DOCKs, has been shown to have roles in the immune system and neurology (36, 48, 120). DOCK9 is a CDC42 GEF (35). It is widely and highly expressed throughout the body, including the brain; however, antibodies against two isoforms of DOCK9 indicated differing expression profiles (121). The role of DOCK9 in structural remodeling of cells was investigated in HeLa epithelial cells, where its expression reduced elongated cell morphology and led to increased filopodia and membrane ruffling (122). Although not reported as a substrate, overexpression of DOCK9 coincided with an increase in RAC1 activity. DOCK9 was recently implicated as a target for the alleviation of papillary thyroid carcinoma due to knockdown leading to reduced proliferation and migratory characteristics (123). Proteomic analysis indicated that DOCK9 interacts with neural AMPA receptors, which regulate synaptic plasticity (124). Such an interaction is worth investigation, as a reported point mutation in the AMPAR subunit GluA3 was shown to cause circadian rhythm disruption and intellectual disability (125). Knockout EAE mouse models of all DOCK-D family members were healthy and viable; DOCK9, however, had no reported change in phenotype, implying it is not involved in MS (120). Despite this result, the identification of structural remodeling as an important biological function of DOCK9 draws comparison to other family members, suggesting that further research is warranted in such areas as immune function. However, its ubiquitous expression increases the likelihood of off-target effects when inhibiting this protein.

DOCK10 (KIAA10694, Zizimin-3, ZIZ3)

DOCK10 is a GEF for both CDC42 and RAC GTPases (42, 43, 44). Unlike DOCK9, it has tissue-selective expression noted in the brain, female reproductive tissues, skin, and lymphoid tissues (Human Protein Atlas), implying it may have a role in neurology and immunity. DOCK10 expression is reportedly induced by interleukin-4 (IL4), which activates signaling pathways involved in cell growth and differentiation (126). In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), IL4 prolongs the survival of CLL cells, which is linked to its known role in B-cell proliferation. This may mean that DOCK10 has a role in the downstream effects of IL4 in CLL cells and could therefore be of therapeutic interest. DOCK10 is also highly expressed in neurites of neuroblastoma cells (36). Recent studies suggest that its inhibition could lead to a milder phenotype of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)-induced EAE, suggesting that like DOCK8 it could be a target for treatment of MS (120). Interestingly, the EAE phenotype was not seen in DOCK9 or DOCK11 knockout mice, which could suggest that its unique binding partners or perhaps the ability of DOCK10 to bind RACs as well as CDC42 may be responsible for its role in neuroinflammation (120). Finally, recent reports implicate DOCK10 in aging processes, with knockout mice living longer than wild type (127). Overall, DOCK10 is a promising therapeutic target for several indications including leukemia, MS, and aging, warranting continued investigation.

DOCK11 (Zizimin-2, ZIZ2)

DOCK11 is a CDC42-specific GEF that is highly expressed in B and T lymphocytes and has been shown to participate in B-cell homeostasis and differentiation mechanisms (94, 97, 128). It is also distributed among various tissues throughout the body (Human Protein Atlas). Similar to DOCK10, several studies have implicated DOCK11 in aging processes. Expression was observed to decrease in mouse lymphoid tissue, where it was reportedly involved in structural remodeling such as filopodial formation (129). It was also linked to Fcγ and TLR4 receptor engagement. Age-related decrease in DOCK11 levels in B-1 cells was related to reduced production of immunoglobulin M, an important factor in immune defense (130). This work was expanded upon by the observation that B-cell signaling is influenced by DOCK11, playing an important role in the generation of antigen specific B-cell populations in germinal centeres (131). In the EAE mouse model for assessing DOCK-D involvement in MS mentioned previously, macrophages from DOCK11 knockout mice exhibited limited migratory capability; however, the MS disease phenotype was not ameliorated by this loss (120). A commonality observed throughout the DOCK family, DOCK11 regulates cellular activities in the immune system, warranting broader investigation into its roles in the various homeostatic and pathological processes associated with inflammation.

Family summary

As a family, the DOCK proteins share common features in their biological functions. Structural remodeling processes that result in motility, membrane organization, axon organization, myelination, and differentiation are all consequences of acting on the RHO GTPases. Therefore, DOCK proteins are often implicated in disease areas where the aforementioned processes can become pathological. Such examples include DOCK-controlled motility resulting in metastasis in cancer (DOCK1), deficient axon organization potentially resulting in a neurological disorder (DOCK4), or deficient immune cell migration resulting in immunodeficiency (DOCK8). In terms of therapeutic intervention, there is the promising possibility of inhibiting DOCK proteins to control metastasis and hyperactive immunity. One such promising example of the latter is identified in DOCK2, where inhibition is hypothesized to downregulate microglia activity and potentially ameliorate AD progression.

Structural overview of the DHR2 domain

Prior to the recent cryo-EM structure of full-length DOCK2 in complex with ELMO1 and RAC1, structural investigation of DOCKs had been limited to recombinant domains with a focus on the catalytic DHR2 domain (Table 1). As detailed above, the DOCK proteins represent a promising class of proteins for pharmaceutical intervention in an array of diseases. There is therefore great interest in analyzing and identifying key mechanisms in the catalysis of GDP dissociation, as well as the structural and mechanistic differences between DOCKs and their GTPase substrates in order to achieve target selectivity.

Despite low sequence homology between DOCKs, DHR2 domains appear to adopt a similar fold that is characterized by three lobes A–C (Fig. 4) (35, 38, 41). From known DHR2 crystal structures, lobe A consists of five (DOCK9, 10) or six (DOCK2) antiparallel helices and is the site for homodimerization with a second DOCK protein (35, 41). Lobe A is not present in the recombinant DHR2 constructs used to generate the structural data for DOCK7 or DOCK8 (from Mus musculus) (42, 113). Therefore, there is a lack of structural insight into conservation of the helical arrangement, as well as the highly variable regions that exist between alpha helices 2 and 3. Lobes B and C are largely responsible for GTPase binding and GEF activity and are well resolved in X-ray crystal structures. Lobe B is formed by two orthogonal and antiparallel beta sheets in an arrangement that is largely conserved between DOCK family members, with variation observed in the interjoining helical regions (41). In DOCK7 it was identified as a sensor of differing switch 1 loop conformations in its dual substrate-binding mode (42). Lobe C, which consists of a 4-helical bundle, also exhibits high conservation in overall structure as well as in GTPase-binding residues. Lobes B and C together dictate GTPase substrate binding, with specificity and discrimination in part determined by DHR2 complementarity with a hydrophobic residue such as the Phe or Trp at position 56 and Ala or Lys at position 27 in RHO GTPases (41). Equivalent residues DOCK2-Tyr1368 and DOCK7-Ile1836 were hypothesized to confer specificity for RAC1 and CDC42 respectively. However, a mutant DOCK7 Ile1836Tyr did not replicate DOCK2 specificity for RAC1, and other factors such as flexibility in lobe B were also hypothesized to contribute to substrate selection (42). Lobe C also contains a helical insert (α10) that houses a critical and universally conserved valine residue that serves as a sensor for nucleotides when bound to GTPases and is key to the mechanism by which GEFs induce GDP dissociation.Figure 4 A, the individual DOCK DHR2 domains, represented as monomers.B, superposition of the DOCK DHR2 domains illustrates their similar overall fold that is segregated into three lobes A–C. Lobe A is made of 5 to 6 alpha helices depending on subfamily, and variations are observed in the interjoining loops between helices (examples highlighted by arrows). This lobe is the site of homodimerization (only DOCK9 dimer shown). Lobe A is not present in the structures of DOCK7 and 8 although predicted to be present based on sequence homology. Lobes B and C are responsible for GTPase substrate binding, discrimination, and catalytic activity. Variability is also observed in the interjoining loops between secondary structures (examples highlighted by arrows). Lobe C contains a universally conserved valine on the α10 insert (highlighted by dotted box), which is responsible for occluding the magnesium that is crucial for the GDP binding. DOCK2 PDB ID: 2YIN; DOCK7 PDB ID: 6AJ4; DOCK8 PDB ID: 3VHL; DOCK9 PDB ID: 2WM9; DOCK10 PDB ID: 6TM1.

The DHR2 mechanism of action

The earliest structures of a DOCK protein detailed a three-step mechanism by which the DOCK9-DHR2 domain elicits GDP dissociation from CDC42 (Fig. 5) (35). In its inactive state, CDC42 binds to GDP with extremely high affinity that is mediated through an extensive network of intermolecular interactions (Fig. 5A) (132). Several residues in the hydrophilic binding pocket are responsible for hydrogen bonding to the base moiety of GDP, while a noteworthy Phe28 from the switch 1 loop contributes a hydrophobic interaction with the guanine nucleobase. The phosphate-binding loop (P-loop) binds to the GDP phosphate moiety, which together chelate an Mg2+ ion, further contributing to the high-affinity interaction. Upon association between CDC42 and the DOCK9-DHR2 domain, three structural features cause a reduction in affinity between CDC42 and GDP (Fig. 5B). First, the CDC42 switch 1 loop is displaced, which results in abrogation of the interaction between Phe28 and the GDP base. Secondly, Cys18 in the P-loop is rotated away from the GDP β-phosphate, disrupting a hydrogen bond between the SH and phosphate. Finally, the aforementioned α10 helical insert present in lobe C of the DOCK9-DHR2 extends into the CDC42-GDP-binding site, placing the nucleotide sensing DOCK9-Val1951 such that it directly occludes Mg2+ binding. This is predicted to cause a dramatic affinity reduction due to interruption of the highly coordinated interaction that includes the P-loop and GDP, as well as loss of the Mg2+ mediated neutralization of the negatively charged nucleotide phosphates. This prediction was strengthened by the observation that replacement of the Val1951 with an alanine severely reduces DOCK GEF activity. The importance of this valine is further supported by its conservation throughout the DOCK family (Fig. 4). Together these structural features encourage the release of GDP and allow a GTP molecule to bind, which results in an active GTPase that can participate in cellular signaling.Figure 5 A, GDP (green sticks) binds to CDC42 (cyan surface, sticks) through an extensive network of intermolecular interactions. Hydrogen bonding and salt bridges are indicated by dashed yellow lines. Most interactions are concentrated around the nucleoside-binding region (cyan sticks) and the phosphate-binding loop (P-loop; red sticks). Right, crucial CDC42 interactions in the GEF -induced GDP dissociation mechanism are highlighted: 1. Phe28 is located in the switch 1 (yellow cartoon, sticks); 2. Cys18 is proximal to the P-loop; 3. Mg2+ (small green sphere) is chelated by GDP phosphates, the P-loop, and several water molecules (small red spheres). (CDC42 PDB ID: 1A4R). B, Left, DOCK9 (Orange surface and cartoon) binds to GDP-bound CDC42 (blue surface) via lobes B and C. For orientation, this representation is the underside of the view presented in Figure 4. Right, close-up of the CDC42 GTP-binding site when bound to DOCK9. Only the critical features involved in the GDP dissociation mechanism are presented. Phe28 and Cys18 rotate away from the GDP molecule, while the DOCK9-Val1951 juts into the active site and occludes Mg2+ binding. The dotted sphere indicates where Mg2+ binding was before DOCK9 binding. The cumulative result of these conformational changes leads to significantly decreased affinity between CDC42 and GDP. (DOCK9:CDC42 PDB ID: 2WMN). Notably, the switch 2 region (green ribbon) of CDC42 is unchanged on DOCK binding.

Targeting GTPases via their complex with DOCKs

Aside from their crucial role in cellular regulation, the activity of GEFs also represents an excellent opportunity for therapeutic intervention. The extremely high affinity with which guanosine nucleotides bind to GTPases ordinarily means that small-molecule inhibitors are unlikely to be able to compete and displace the substrates effectively (133). However, GEF activity induces a conformation wherein GDP-binding affinity is greatly reduced, coinciding with a large increase in dissociation rate, making substrate displacement much more feasible (134). X-ray crystallography is an amenable technique for this purpose, as it is possible to trap GTPases in this state upon crystallization of the GTPase-GEF complexes, allowing for compound screening via a platform such as XChem at Diamond Light Source as well as facilitating subsequent chemical design (135, 136). This rationale was used in the development of a Target Enabling Package for the DH GEF Kalirin and RAC1 recently developed by the Structural Genomics Consortium (137). It is important that such experiments are accompanied by in-solution experiments to confirm the crystallographically determined mode of binding. Through this approach it would be feasible to design inhibitors that bind specifically to the unique site, which arises upon GEF-GTPase complexation (Fig. 6A). Indeed, a reported inhibitor for DOCK5 was observed to cause a nonfunctional and inhibitory complex; however, the atomic binding mode for this compound is not yet publicly known (91). Additional possibilities for inhibition of GTPase pathways include inhibiting the broad GEF-GTPase protein–protein interaction at lobes B or C of the DOCK2-DHR2. For example, in the DOCK2-RAC1 complex, switch 1 loop residues Val36 and Phe37 of RAC1 bind into hydrophobic grooves in lobe C of the DOCK2 DHR2 domain (Fig. 6B). Such regions are potential targets for disruption of the protein–protein interaction. Indeed, small structural differences at this region such as the aforementioned complementarity between residues 27 and 56 on GTPases and the DHR2 domain are enough to control the stringent discrimination for DOCK substrate selection. Accordingly, chemical interrogation of this region could potentially disrupt complex formation, preventing the ability for GTPases to return to an active state once bound to GDP. A similar protein–protein interaction inhibitor approach has been applied to the RAS GEF SOS1 as potential cancer therapeutics (11, 12). Finally, targeting the DHR1 phospholipid-binding site could prevent complex localization to the membrane.Figure 6 Potential options for drugging the DOCK-GTPase complex.Left, overview of the DOCK2-RAC1 complex (electrostatic surface, pink ribbon respectively; PDB ID: 2YIN). A, an electrostatic representation of the DOCK2-RAC1 interface, overlaid with RAC1-GDPNP (PDB ID: 3TH5) to visualize the GTP (green sticks) binding site. The RAC1 surface is highlighted by the transparent white mask. The nucleotide sensing Val1539 that is unique to DOCK proteins binds adjacent to the β and ɣ-phosphates of GTP. Compounds that bind the P-loop may benefit from an adjacent hydrophobic group for complementarity to this residue. This could also confer selective for DOCK2 over DH GEFs. The interface visible here is predominantly due to the switch 1 loop interacting with lobe C of the DOCK2-DHR2 domain. Due to variation observed in this region, compounds that bind to this region could potentially achieve selective targeting between DOCK subfamilies. B, the switch 1 loop (yellow sticks) of RAC1 (pink ribbon) binds into a hydrophobic groove in lobe C of the DOCK2-DHR2 domain (electrostatic surface). Complementarity to this groove is observed with Val36 and Phe37, highlighting a potential target for inhibition at the protein–protein interface of the complex. The Phe28 involved in binding the nucleotide also binds into a pocket on lobe C of the DOCK2-DHR2. For orientation, the view is looking through RAC1 with the switch 2 and the P-loop (green, red ribbon respectively) visible at the top. Electrostatic surfaces generated by ICM Molsoft.

The various crystal structures of DOCK-GTPase complexes (Table 1) reveal that the conformation of the GTPase nucleotide-binding site alters in a manner that varies between GEF partners, implying the possibility of selective compound design. The DOCK mechanism of eliciting GDP dissociation is distinct from the canonical DH-domain containing GEFs, where Mg2+ occlusion is typically accomplished by eliciting displacement of the GTPase switch 2 loop (35). As previously mentioned, the universal nucleotide sensing Val (Fig. 4, Residue 1951 in DOCK9, Fig. 5B; 1539 in DOCK2, Fig. 6A) is unique to the DOCK subfamily. This valine protrudes into the GTPase nucleotide-binding site proximal to the β and ɣ-phosphates of GTP, which bind to the P-loop backbone through electrostatic and hydrogen-bonding interactions. Inhibitor design aiming to exploit these potentially high-affinity contacts may be accompanied by an adjacent hydrophobic group to bind the valine and contribute further to binding affinity. Such an inhibitor binding to this residue or those on the nearby α10 insert could potentially prevent the transient DOCK GEF-GTPase complex from dissociating, preventing the propagation of signaling. Selectivity for DOCK-GTPases over GTPases alone or with other GEF complexes could prevent potential off-target effects of targeting these pleiotropic proteins.

In contrast to the DH GEFs such as Kalirin, the DOCK GEFs do not induce changes in the switch 2 region of their GTPase substrates and conformational changes are confined to switch 1 (Figs. 5 and 7, A–D). Targeting the GTPase switch 1 loop is a promising avenue for inhibitor design. One could take advantage of the guanine nucleobase-binding pocket to provide an anchor for inhibitors to bind the DOCK-GTPase complex. Here, the switch 1 loop undergoes conformational changes to form an interface that is a topologically wide groove, characterized by complementarity between the proteins through charged and hydrophobic regions (Fig. 6A). Switch 1 conformational changes occur in a manner dependent on the interacting DOCK. The sequence and structure of the DHR2 B-C lobes of DOCK2 and DOCK9 result in nonidentical switch 1 loop conformations in RAC1 and CDC42 respectively (Fig. 7, C and D) (41). This phenomenon appears to be consistent within related DOCK subfamilies, with DOCKs 7, 8, 9, and 10 (DOCK-C, D members) eliciting similar switch 1 conformations in their partner GTPases whether it is CDC42 or RAC1, whereas DOCK2 (DOCK-A subfamily) elicits a different conformation in the switch 1 loop of RAC1. This is again in contrast to DH GEFs, which elicit similar conformational changes in their GTPases substrates throughout the family. The DOCK-induced conformational changes result in slightly altered GTPase pockets, including differing orientations of the aforementioned Phe28 in CDC42 and RAC1, an important residue in binding the GTPase nucleotide substrate (Figure 5, Figure 6, Figure 7). A small molecule designed in a way that specifically binds to this induced conformation may be selective for the DOCK-GTPase complex over the GTPase alone, the DH GEF-GTPase complex, or even between different DOCK subfamilies, leading to an even higher degree of selectivity.Figure 7 Illustration of variation in the switch loops of RAC1 (pink cartoon) and CDC42 (cyan cartoon). GDP (green sticks) and the P-loop (red cartoon) are visible for orientation. Switch loops are colored dependent on their conformation as a result of complexation with a GEF. GEFs are not depicted for viewing clarity in panels B–D. A, the switch loop conformations in CDC42 when bound to GDP but not complexed with a GEF. These conformations vary minimally between RHO GTPases when bound to GDP, CDC42 is used to represent all here. PDB ID: 1A4R. B, Kalirin elicits altered switch 1 (beige cartoon and sticks) and switch 2 (brown cartoon) loop conformations compared with those in the noncomplexed GTPase represented in panel A. Of note, however, is the similarity observed in residue Phe28. Kalirin is representative of all DH GEFs, which elicit similar switch loop conformational changes throughout the family. PDB ID: 5QU9. C, DOCK2 also elicits an altered switch 1 loop (orange cartoon) compared with GTPase alone (yellow cartoon, panel A). The switch 1 loop is also distinct from the conformation observed when RAC1 is bound to Kalirin (panel B), exemplified by the highlighted Phe28 residue. The switch 2 loop conformation is identical to that of CDC42 alone and is thus distinct from that observed in the RAC1-Kalirin structure. PDB ID: 2YIN. D, finally, the CDC42 switch 1 loop conformation is different again in the DOCK9 complexed structure. Here, DOCK9 is representative of all known DOCK-C and D GEFs, which elicit the same conformational change. These differences highlight the potential for selective targeting of GTPases when bound to DH GEFs or different DOCK families. PDB ID: 2WMN.

Conclusions

Acting on the universal and pleiotropic GTPases, the DOCK GEFs are responsible for controlling many essential biological processes, particularly structural remodeling of cells leading to migration, differentiation, and proliferation in many cell types. This family of proteins is consequently implicated in various diseases, ranging from cancer to neurodegeneration. Distinct structurally and mechanistically from the larger DBL homology (DH) family of RHO GEFs, DOCKs present an opportunity for selective modulation of GTPase pathways with small molecules. The transitioning GTPase exhibits a GEF-induced reduction in affinity for its substrate nucleotide. Thus, the GEF-GTPase complex may present a feasible opportunity to compete with small-molecule inhibitors instead of the GTPase alone. The pockets forming in the DOCK-GTPase complex appear to have structural differences, which bodes well for the development of inhibitors selective for certain DOCK-controlled signaling cascades, which differ between the families. While there is a growing body of literature concerning the biological function and structural mechanism of DOCK proteins, there remain gaps in current knowledge of this field. The vast majority of investigation into RHO GTPases has been limited to the RAC1, CDC42, and RHOA proteins, a small subset of the RHO family. To further our understanding of the RHO GTPase pathways, it is imperative to apply similar methodologies to those presented in this review to the remaining members of the RHO GTPase family, including the RhoA, RhoBTB, RhoD/F, RHOU/V, and RND subfamilies and their cognate DOCK GEFs. Finally, there is currently a limited number of small-molecule inhibitors with which to probe the activity of the DOCKs, such molecules would provide integral insight into their modulation for treating disease and provide starting points from which to design and discover new drugs.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

Author contributions

A. P. T. prepared the figures and wrote the article with input from C. B., who also aided with research. J. L. G. and F. v. D. assisted in proof reading, background information, and valuable discussion. P. E. B. conceived the study and oversaw article preparation.
==== Refs
References

1 Boureux A. Vignal E. Faure S. Fort P. Evolution of the Rho family of ras-like GTPases in eukaryotes Mol. Biol. Evol. 24 2007 203 216 17035353
2 Wennerberg K. The Ras superfamily at a glance J. Cell Sci. 118 2005 843 846 15731001
3 Hoon J.L. Tan M.H. Koh C.-G. The regulation of cellular responses to mechanical cues by rho GTPases Cells 5 2016 17
4 Hanna S. El-Sibai M. Signaling networks of rho GTPases in cell motility Cell. Signal. 25 2013 1955 1961 23669310
5 Clayton N.S. Ridley A.J. Targeting Rho GTPase signaling networks in cancer Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8 2020 222 32309283
6 Gray J.L. von Delft F. Brennan P.E. Targeting the small GTPase superfamily through their regulatory proteins Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 59 2020 6342 6366 30869179
7 Vetter I.R. Wittinghofer A. The guanine nucleotide-binding switch in three dimensions Science 294 2001 1299 1304 11701921
8 Bourne H.R. Sanders D.A. McCormick F. The GTPase superfamily: Conserved structure and molecular mechanism Nature 349 1991 117 127 1898771
9 DeGeer J. Lamarche-Vane N. Rho GTPases in neurodegeneration diseases Exp. Cell Res. 319 2013 2384 2394 23830879
10 Boettner B. Van Aelst L. The role of Rho GTPases in disease development Gene 286 2002 155 174 11943472
11 Hillig R.C. Sautier B. Schroeder J. Moosmayer D. Hilpmann A. Stegmann C.M. Werbeck N.D. Briem H. Boemer U. Weiske J. Badock V. Mastouri J. Petersen K. Siemeister G. Kahmann J.D. Discovery of potent SOS1 inhibitors that block RAS activation via disruption of the RAS–SOS1 interaction Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 116 2019 2551 2560 30683722
12 Hofmann M.H. Gmachl M. Ramharter J. Savarese F. Gerlach D. Marszalek J.R. Sanderson M.P. Kessler D. Trapani F. Arnhof H. Rumpel K. Botesteanu D.-A. Ettmayer P. Gerstberger T. Kofink C. BI-3406, a potent and selective SOS1::KRAS interaction inhibitor, is effective in KRAS-driven cancers through combined MEK inhibition Cancer Discov. 2020 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-0142
13 Oxford G. Theodorescu D. Review article: The role of Ras superfamily proteins in bladder cancer progression J. Urol. 170 2003 1987 1993 14532839
14 Moura M.M. Cavaco B.M. Leite V. RAS proto-oncogene in medullary thyroid carcinoma Endocr. Relat. Cancer 22 2015 R235 252 26285815
15 Fernández-Medarde A. Santos E. Ras in cancer and developmental diseases Genes Cancer 2 2011 344 358 21779504
16 Lefort R. Reversing synapse loss in Alzheimer’s disease: Rho-guanosine triphosphatases and insights from other brain disorders Neurotherapeutics 12 2015 19 28 25588580
17 Maldonado M.D.M. Medina J.I. Velazquez L. Dharmawardhane S. Targeting Rac and Cdc42 GEFs in metastatic cancer Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8 2020 201 32322580
18 Luo L. Rho GTPases in neuronal morphogenesis Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 1 2000 173 180 11257905
19 Haga R.B. Ridley A.J. Rho GTPases: Regulation and roles in cancer cell biology Small GTPases 7 2016 207 221 27628050
20 Van Aelst L. D’Souza-Schorey C. Rho GTPases and signaling networks Genes Dev. 11 1997 2295 2322 9308960
21 Nayak R.C. Chang K.-H. Vaitinadin N.-S. Cancelas J.A. Rho GTPases control specific cytoskeleton-dependent functions of hematopoietic stem cells Immunol. Rev. 256 2013 255 268 24117826
22 Hall A. Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton Science 279 1998 509 514 9438836
23 Guo D. Yang X. Shi L. Rho GTPase regulators and effectors in autism spectrum disorders: Animal models and insights for therapeutics Cells 9 2020 835
24 Koh C.-G. Rho GTPases and their regulators in neuronal functions and development Neurosignals 15 2006 228 237 17409776
25 Li Z. Van Aelst L. Cline H.T. Rho GTPases regulate distinct aspects of dendritic arbor growth in Xenopus central neurons in vivo Nat. Neurosci. 3 2000 217 225 10700252
26 Konietzny A. Bär J. Mikhaylova M. Dendritic actin cytoskeleton: Structure, functions, and regulations Front. Cell. Neurosci. 11 2017 147 28572759
27 Wegner A.M. Nebhan C.A. Hu L. Majumdar D. Meier K.M. Weaver A.M. Webb D.J. N-WASP and the Arp2/3 complex are critical regulators of actin in the development of dendritic spines and synapses J. Biol. Chem. 283 2008 15912 15920 18430734
28 Stankiewicz T.R. Linseman D.A. Rho family GTPases: Key players in neuronal development, neuronal survival, and neurodegeneration Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8 2014 314 25339865
29 Boo J.H. Sohn J.H. Kim J.E. Song H. Mook-Jung I. Rac1 changes the substrate specificity of γ-secretase between amyloid precursor protein and Notch1 Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 372 2008 913 917 18538664
30 Cook D.R. Rossman K.L. Der C.J. Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors: Regulators of rho GTPase activity in development and disease Oncogene 33 2014 4021 4035 24037532
31 Jaiswal M. Dvorsky R. Ahmadian M.R. Deciphering the molecular and functional basis of Dbl family proteins J. Biol. Chem. 288 2013 4486 4500 23255595
32 Premkumar L. Bobkov A.A. Patel M. Jaroszewski L. Bankston L.A. Stec B. Vuori K. Côté J.-F. Liddington R.C. Structural basis of membrane targeting by the Dock180 family of rho family guanine exchange factors (Rho-GEFs) J. Biol. Chem. 285 2010 13211 13222 20167601
33 Pakes N.K. Veltman D.M. Williams R.S.B. Zizimin and Dock guanine nucleotide exchange factors in cell function and disease Small GTPases 4 2013 22 27 23247359
34 Brugnera E. Haney L. Grimsley C. Lu M. Walk S.F. Tosello-Trampont A.-C. Macara I.G. Madhani H. Fink G.R. Ravichandran K.S. Unconventional Rac-GEF activity is mediated through the Dock180–ELMO complex Nat. Cell Biol. 4 2002 574 582 12134158
35 Yang J. Zhang Z. Roe S.M. Marshall C.J. Barford D. Activation of rho GTPases by DOCK exchange factors is mediated by a nucleotide sensor Science 325 2009 1398 1402 19745154
36 Shi L. Dock protein family in brain development and neurological disease Commun. Integr. Biol. 6 2013 e26839
37 Hanawa-Suetsugu K. Kukimoto-Niino M. Mishima-Tsumagari C. Akasaka R. Ohsawa N. Sekine S. Ito T. Tochio N. Koshiba S. Kigawa T. Terada T. Shirouzu M. Nishikimi A. Uruno T. Katakai T. Structural basis for mutual relief of the Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor DOCK2 and its partner ELMO1 from their autoinhibited forms Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109 2012 3305 3310 22331897
38 Chang L. Yang J. Jo C.H. Boland A. Zhang Z. McLaughlin S.H. Abu-Thuraia A. Killoran R.C. Smith M.J. Côté J.-F. Barford D. Structure of the DOCK2−ELMO1 complex provides insights into regulation of the auto-inhibited state Nat. Commun. 11 2020 3464 32651375
39 Zimmermann L. Stephens A. Nam S.-Z. Rau D. Kübler J. Lozajic M. Gabler F. Söding J. Lupas A.N. Alva V. A completely reimplemented MPI bioinformatics toolkit with a new HHpred server at its core J. Mol. Biol. 430 2018 2237 2243 29258817
40 Miyamoto Y. Torii T. Yamamori N. Ogata T. Tanoue A. Yamauchi J. Akt and PP2A reciprocally regulate the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Dock6 to control axon growth of sensory neurons Sci. Signal. 6 2013 ra15
41 Kulkarni K. Yang J. Zhang Z. Barford D. Multiple factors confer specific Cdc42 and Rac protein activation by dedicator of cytokinesis (DOCK) nucleotide exchange factors J. Biol. Chem. 286 2011 25341 25351 21613211
42 Kukimoto-Niino M. Tsuda K. Ihara K. Mishima-Tsumagari C. Honda K. Ohsawa N. Shirouzu M. Structural basis for the dual substrate specificity of DOCK7 guanine nucleotide exchange factor Structure 27 2019 741 748.e3 30853411
43 Miyamoto Y. Yamauchi J. Sanbe A. Tanoue A. Dock6, a Dock-C subfamily guanine nucleotide exchanger, has the dual specificity for Rac1 and Cdc42 and regulates neurite outgrowth Exp. Cell Res. 313 2007 791 804 17196961
44 Ruiz-Lafuente N. Alcaraz-García M.-J. García-Serna A.-M. Sebastián-Ruiz S. Moya-Quiles M.-R. García-Alonso A.-M. Parrado A. Dock10, a Cdc42 and Rac1 GEF, induces loss of elongation, filopodia, and ruffles in cervical cancer epithelial HeLa cells Biol. Open. 4 2015 627 635 25862245
45 Uhlén M. Fagerberg L. Hallström B.M. Lindskog C. Oksvold P. Mardinoglu A. Sivertsson Å. Kampf C. Sjöstedt E. Asplund A. Olsson I. Edlund K. Lundberg E. Navani S. Szigyarto C.A.-K. Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the human proteome Science 347 2015 1260419 25613900
46 Uhlen M. Zhang C. Lee S. Sjöstedt E. Fagerberg L. Bidkhori G. Benfeitas R. Arif M. Liu Z. Edfors F. Sanli K. von Feilitzen K. Oksvold P. Lundberg E. Hober S. A pathology atlas of the human cancer transcriptome Science 357 2017 eaan2507
47 Thul P.J. Åkesson L. Wiking M. Mahdessian D. Geladaki A. Blal H.A. Alm T. Asplund A. Björk L. Breckels L.M. Bäckström A. Danielsson F. Fagerberg L. Fall J. Gatto L. A subcellular map of the human proteome Science 356 2017 eaal3321
48 Namekata K. Kimura A. Kawamura K. Harada C. Harada T. Dock GEFs and their therapeutic potential: Neuroprotection and axon regeneration Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 43 2014 1 16 25016980
49 Chen Y. Chen Y. Yin W. Han H. Miller H. Li J. Herrada A.A. Kubo M. Sui Z. Gong Q. Liu C. The regulation of DOCK family proteins on T and B cells J. Leukoc. Biol. 109 2020 383 394 32542827
50 Kunimura K. Uruno T. Fukui Y. DOCK family proteins: Key players in immune surveillance mechanisms Int. Immunol. 32 2020 5 15 31630188
51 Liang Y. Wang S. Zhang Y. Downregulation of Dock1 and Elmo1 suppresses the migration and invasion of triple-negative breast cancer epithelial cells through the RhoA/Rac1 pathway Oncol. Lett. 16 2018 3481 3488 30127952
52 Gumienny T.L. Brugnera E. Tosello-Trampont A.C. Kinchen J.M. Haney L.B. Nishiwaki K. Walk S.F. Nemergut M.E. Macara I.G. Francis R. Schedl T. Qin Y. Van Aelst L. Hengartner M.O. Ravichandran K.S. CED-12/ELMO, a novel member of the CrkII/Dock180/Rac pathway, is required for phagocytosis and cell migration Cell 107 2001 27 41 11595183
53 Grimsley C.M. Kinchen J.M. Tosello-Trampont A.-C. Brugnera E. Haney L.B. Lu M. Chen Q. Klingele D. Hengartner M.O. Ravichandran K.S. Dock180 and ELMO1 proteins cooperate to promote evolutionarily conserved Rac-dependent cell migration J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 6087 6097 14638695
54 Tomino T. Tajiri H. Tatsuguchi T. Shirai T. Oisaki K. Matsunaga S. Sanematsu F. Sakata D. Yoshizumi T. Maehara Y. Kanai M. Cote J.-F. Fukui Y. Uruno T. DOCK1 inhibition suppresses cancer cell invasion and macropinocytosis induced by self-activating Rac1P29S mutation Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 497 2018 298 304 29432733
55 Ridley A.J. Membrane ruffling and signal transduction Bioessays 16 1994 321 327 8024541
56 Lu M. Ravichandran K.S. Dock180-ELMO cooperation in Rac activation Methods Enzymol. 406 2006 388 402 16472672
57 Chiang S.-K. Chang W.-C. Chen S.-E. Chang L.-C. DOCK1 regulates growth and motility through the RRP1B-Claudin-1 pathway in claudin-low breast cancer cells Cancers (Basel) 11 2019 1762
58 Cunningham R.L. Herbert A.L. Harty B.L. Ackerman S.D. Monk K.R. Mutations in dock1 disrupt early Schwann cell development Neural Dev. 13 2018 17 30089513
59 Ushijima M. Uruno T. Nishikimi A. Sanematsu F. Kamikaseda Y. Kunimura K. Sakata D. Okada T. Fukui Y. The Rac activator DOCK2 mediates plasma cell differentiation and IgG antibody production Front. Immunol. 9 2018 243 29503648
60 Wu M. Li L. Small D. Duffield A.S. DOCK2 expression affects leukemogenesis and disease progression in a murine model of FLT3/ITD acute myeloid leukemia Blood 134 2019 2534
61 Chen Y. Meng F. Wang B. He L. Liu Y. Liu Z. Dock2 in the development of inflammation and cancer Eur. J. Immunol. 48 2018 915 922 29509960
62 Kikuchi T. Kubonishi S. Shibakura M. Namba N. Matsui T. Fukui Y. Tanimoto M. Katayama Y. Dock2 participates in bone marrow lympho-hematopoiesis Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 367 2008 90 96 18157938
63 Ippagunta S.K. Malireddi R.K.S. Shaw P.J. Neale G.A. Vande Walle L. Green D.R. Fukui Y. Lamkanfi M. Kanneganti T.-D. The inflammasome adaptor ASC regulates adaptive immune cell functions by controlling DOCK2-mediated Rac activation and actin polymerization Nat. Immunol. 12 2011 1010 1016 21892172
64 Dobbs K. Domínguez Conde C. Zhang S.-Y. Parolini S. Audry M. Chou J. Haapaniemi E. Keles S. Bilic I. Okada S. Massaad M.J. Rounioja S. Alwahadneh A.M. Serwas N.K. Capuder K. Inherited DOCK2 deficiency in patients with early-onset invasive infections N. Engl. J. Med. 372 2015 2409 2422 26083206
65 Ayana R. Singh S. Pati S. Deconvolution of human brain cell type transcriptomes unraveled microglia-specific potential biomarkers Front. Neurol. 9 2018 266 29755398
66 Cimino P.J. Sokal I. Leverenz J. Fukui Y. Montine T.J. DOCK2 is a microglial specific regulator of central nervous system innate immunity found in normal and Alzheimer’s disease brain Am. J. Pathol. 175 2009 1622 1630 19729484
67 Cimino P.J. Yang Y. Li X. Hemingway J.F. Cherne M.K. Khademi S.B. Fukui Y. Montine K.S. Montine T.J. Keene C.D. Ablation of the microglial protein DOCK2 reduces amyloid burden in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Exp. Mol. Pathol. 94 2013 366 371 23318649
68 Hemonnot A.-L. Hua J. Ulmann L. Hirbec H. Microglia in Alzheimer disease: Well-known targets and new opportunities Front. Aging Neurosci. 11 2019 233 31543810
69 Laurin M. Cote J.-F. Insights into the biological functions of Dock family guanine nucleotide exchange factors Genes Dev. 28 2014 533 547 24637113
70 Wiltrout K. Ferrer A. van de Laar I. Namekata K. Harada T. Klee E.W. Zimmerman M.T. Cousin M.A. Kempainen J.L. Babovic-Vuksanovic D. van Slegtenhorst M.A. Aarts-Tesselaar C.D. Schnur R.E. Andrews M. Shinawi M. Variants in DOCK3 cause developmental delay and hypotonia Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 27 2019 1225 1234 30976111
71 Namekata K. Enokido Y. Iwasawa K. Kimura H. MOCA induces membrane spreading by activating Rac1 J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 14331 14337 14718541
72 Namekata K. Harada C. Taya C. Guo X. Kimura H. Parada L.F. Harada T. Dock3 induces axonal outgrowth by stimulating membrane recruitment of the WAVE complex Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 2010 7586 7591 20368433
73 Namekata K. Watanabe H. Guo X. Kittaka D. Kawamura K. Kimura A. Harada C. Harada T. Dock3 regulates BDNF-TrkB signaling for neurite outgrowth by forming a ternary complex with Elmo and RhoG Genes Cells 17 2012 688 697 22734669
74 Namekata K. Harada C. Guo X. Kimura A. Kittaka D. Watanabe H. Harada T. Dock3 stimulates axonal outgrowth via GSK-3β-mediated microtubule assembly J. Neurosci. 32 2012 264 274 22219288
75 Kelleher R.J. Shen J. Presenilin-1 mutations and Alzheimer’s disease Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114 2017 629 631 28082723
76 Wolfe M.S. γ-Secretase as a target for Alzheimer’s disease Adv. Pharmacol. 64 2012 127 153 22840746
77 Tate B. McKee T.D. Loureiro R.M.B. Dumin J.A. Xia W. Pojasek K. Austin W.F. Fuller N.O. Hubbs J.L. Shen R. Jonker J. Ives J. Bronk B.S. Modulation of gamma-secretase for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease Int. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2012 2012 210756 23320246
78 Tam J.H. Seah C. Pasternak S.H. The amyloid precursor protein is rapidly transported from the Golgi apparatus to the lysosome and where it is processed into beta-amyloid Mol. Brain 7 2014 54 25085554
79 Kashiwa A. Yoshida H. Lee S. Paladino T. Liu Y. Chen Q. Dargusch R. Schubert D. Kimura H. Isolation and characterization of novel presenilin binding protein J. Neurochem. 75 2000 109 116 10854253
80 Chen Q. Kimura H. Schubert D. A novel mechanism for the regulation of amyloid precursor protein metabolism J. Cell Biol. 158 2002 79 89 12093789
81 Tachi N. Hashimoto Y. Matsuoka M. MOCA is an integrator of the neuronal death signals that are activated by familial Alzheimer’s disease-related mutants of amyloid β precursor protein and presenilins Biochem. J. 442 2012 413 422 22115042
82 Yajnik V. Paulding C. Sordella R. McClatchey A.I. Saito M. Wahrer D.C.R. Reynolds P. Bell D.W. Lake R. van den Heuvel S. Settleman J. Haber D.A. DOCK4, a GTPase activator, is disrupted during tumorigenesis Cell 112 2003 673 684 12628187
83 Ueda S. Fujimoto S. Hiramoto K. Negishi M. Katoh H. Dock4 regulates dendritic development in hippocampal neurons J. Neurosci. Res. 86 2008 3052 3061 18615735
84 Xiao Y. Peng Y. Wan J. Tang G. Chen Y. Tang J. Ye W.-C. Ip N.Y. Shi L. The atypical guanine nucleotide exchange factor Dock4 regulates neurite differentiation through modulation of Rac1 GTPase and actin dynamics J. Biol. Chem. 288 2013 20034 20045 23720743
85 Huang M. Liang C. Li S. Zhang J. Guo D. Zhao B. Liu Y. Peng Y. Xu J. Liu W. Guo G. Shi L. Two autism/dyslexia linked variations of DOCK4 disrupt the gene function on Rac1/Rap1 activation, neurite outgrowth, and synapse development Front. Cell. Neurosci. 13 2019 577 32009906
86 Maestrini E. Pagnamenta A.T. Lamb J.A. Bacchelli E. Sykes N.H. Sousa I. Toma C. Barnby G. Butler H. Winchester L. Scerri T.S. Minopoli F. Reichert J. Cai G. Buxbaum J.D. High-density SNP association study and copy number variation analysis of the AUTS1 and AUTS5 loci implicate the IMMP2L-DOCK4 gene region in autism susceptibility Mol. Psychiatry 15 2010 954 968 19401682
87 Liang S. Wang X. Zou M. Wang H. Zhou X. Sun C. Xia W. Wu L. Fujisawa T.X. Tomoda A. Family-based association study of ZNF533, DOCK4 and IMMP2L gene polymorphisms linked to autism in a northeastern Chinese Han population J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci. B 15 2014 264 271 24599690
88 McNally L. Zhou Y. Robinson J.F. Zhao G. Chen L.-M. Chen H. Kim M.Y. Kapidzic M. Gormley M. Hannibal R. Fisher S.J. Up-regulated cytotrophoblast DOCK4 contributes to over-invasion in placenta accreta spectrum Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 117 2020 15852 15861 32576693
89 Westbrook J.A. Wood S.L. Cairns D.A. McMahon K. Gahlaut R. Thygesen H. Shires M. Roberts S. Marshall H. Oliva M.R. Dunning M.J. Hanby A.M. Selby P.J. Speirs V. Mavria G. Identification and validation of DOCK4 as a potential biomarker for risk of bone metastasis development in patients with early breast cancer J. Pathol. 247 2019 381 391 30426503
90 Huang L. Chambliss K.L. Gao X. Yuhanna I.S. Behling-Kelly E. Bergaya S. Ahmed M. Michaely P. Luby-Phelps K. Darehshouri A. Xu L. Fisher E.A. Ge W.-P. Mineo C. Shaul P.W. SR-B1 drives endothelial cell LDL transcytosis via DOCK4 to promote atherosclerosis Nature 569 2019 565 569 31019307
91 Ferrandez Y. Zhang W. Peurois F. Akendengué L. Blangy A. Zeghouf M. Cherfils J. Allosteric inhibition of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor DOCK5 by a small molecule Sci. Rep. 7 2017 14409 29089502
92 Lai Y. Zhao A. Tan M. Yang M. Lin Y. Li S. Song J. Zheng H. Zhu Z. Liu D. Liu C. Li L. Yang G. DOCK5 regulates energy balance and hepatic insulin sensitivity by targeting mTORC1 signaling EMBO Rep. 21 2020 e49473
93 Vives V. Laurin M. Cres G. Larrousse P. Morichaud Z. Noel D. Côté J.-F. Blangy A. The Rac1 exchange factor Dock5 is essential for bone resorption by osteoclasts J. Bone Miner. Res. 26 2011 1099 1110 21542010
94 Gadea G. Blangy A. Dock-family exchange factors in cell migration and disease Eur. J. Cell Biol. 93 2014 466 477 25022758
95 Pankratz N. Dumitriu A. Hetrick K.N. Sun M. Latourelle J.C. Wilk J.B. Halter C. Doheny K.F. Gusella J.F. Nichols W.C. Myers R.H. Foroud T. DeStefano A.L. Copy number variation in familial Parkinson disease PLoS One 6 2011 e20988
96 Umehara H. Nakamura M. Nagai M. Kato Y. Ueno S. Sano A. Positional cloning and comprehensive mutation analysis of a Japanese family with lithium-responsive bipolar disorder identifies a novel DOCK5 mutation J. Hum. Genet. 66 2021 243 249 32920599
97 Nishikimi A. Kukimoto-Niino M. Yokoyama S. Fukui Y. Immune regulatory functions of DOCK family proteins in health and disease Exp. Cell Res. 319 2013 2343 2349 23911989
98 Sukalo M. Tilsen F. Kayserili H. Müller D. Tüysüz B. Ruddy D.M. Wakeling E. Ørstavik K.H. Snape K.M. Trembath R. De Smedt M. van der Aa N. Skalej M. Mundlos S. Wuyts W. DOCK6 mutations are responsible for a distinct autosomal-recessive variant of Adams-Oliver syndrome associated with brain and eye anomalies Hum. Mutat. 36 2015 593 598 25824905
99 Wang Z. Wang X. Lou G. Qin L. Bian S. Tang X. Zhu H. Wang S. Hao B. Liao S. Novel compound heterozygous mutations of the DOCK6 gene in a familial case of Adams-Oliver syndrome 2 Gene 700 2019 65 69 30898718
100 Alzahem T. Alsalamah A.K. Mura M. Alsulaiman S.M. A novel variant in DOCK6 gene associated with Adams-Oliver syndrome type 2 Ophthalmic Genet. 41 2020 377 380 32498638
101 Dudoignon B. Huber C. Michot C. Di Rocco F. Girard M. Lyonnet S. Rio M. Rabia S.H. Daire V.C. Baujat G. Expanding the phenotype in Adams-Oliver syndrome correlating with the genotype Am. J. Med. Genet. A 182 2020 29 37 31654484
102 Wang C.-S. Tsai C.-Y. Lee K.-F. Kuo L.-M. Lin K.-H. Association of DOCK6 with cancer stem cell development and as an independent prognostic factor of gastric cancer J. Clin. Oncol. 35 2017 68
103 Chi H.-C. Tsai C.-Y. Wang C.-S. Yang H.-Y. Lo C.-H. Wang W.-J. Lee K.-F. Lai L.-Y. Hong J.-H. Chang Y.-F. Tsai M.-M. Yeh C.-T. Wu C.H. Hsieh C.-C. Wang L.-H. DOCK6 promotes chemo- and radioresistance of gastric cancer by modulating WNT/β-catenin signaling and cancer stem cell traits Oncogene 39 2020 5933 5949 32753649
104 Watabe-Uchida M. John K.A. Janas J.A. Newey S.E. Aelst L.V. The Rac activator DOCK7 regulates neuronal polarity through local phosphorylation of Stathmin/Op18 Neuron 51 2006 727 739 16982419
105 Pinheiro E.M. Gertler F.B. Nervous Rac: DOCK7 regulation of axon formation Neuron 51 2006 674 676 16982410
106 Yang Y.-T. Wang C.-L. Van Aelst L. DOCK7 interacts with TACC3 to regulate interkinetic nuclear migration and cortical neurogenesis Nat. Neurosci. 15 2012 1201 1210 22842144
107 Nakamuta S. Yang Y.-T. Wang C.-L. Gallo N.B. Yu J.-R. Tai Y. Van Aelst L. Dual role for DOCK7 in tangential migration of interneuron precursors in the postnatal forebrain J. Cell Biol. 216 2017 4313 4330 29089377
108 Murray D.W. Didier S. Chan A. Paulino V. Van Aelst L. Ruggieri R. Tran N.L. Byrne A.T. Symons M. Guanine nucleotide exchange factor Dock7 mediates HGF-induced glioblastoma cell invasion via Rac activation Br. J. Cancer 110 2014 1307 1315 24518591
109 Yamauchi J. Miyamoto Y. Hamasaki H. Sanbe A. Kusakawa S. Nakamura A. Tsumura H. Maeda M. Nemoto N. Kawahara K. Torii T. Tanoue A. The atypical guanine-nucleotide exchange factor, Dock7, negatively regulates Schwann cell differentiation and myelination J. Neurosci. 31 2011 12579 12592 21880919
110 Bai B. Guo Y.-R. Zhang Y.-H. Jin C.-C. Zhang J.-M. Chen H. Zhu B.-S. Novel DOCK7 mutations in a Chinese patient with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 23 Chin. Med. J. (Engl.). 132 2019 600 603 30807358
111 Turkdogan D. Turkyilmaz A. Gormez Z. Sager G. Ekinci G. A novel truncating mutation of DOCK7 gene with an early-onset non-encephalopathic epilepsy Seizure 66 2019 12 14 30771731
112 Perrault I. Hamdan F.F. Rio M. Capo-Chichi J.-M. Boddaert N. Décarie J.-C. Maranda B. Nabbout R. Sylvain M. Lortie A. Roux P.P. Rossignol E. Gérard X. Barcia G. Berquin P. Mutations in DOCK7 in individuals with epileptic encephalopathy and cortical blindness Am. J. Hum. Genet. 94 2014 891 897 24814191
113 Harada Y. Tanaka Y. Terasawa M. Pieczyk M. Habiro K. Katakai T. Hanawa-Suetsugu K. Kukimoto-Niino M. Nishizaki T. Shirouzu M. Duan X. Uruno T. Nishikimi A. Sanematsu F. Yokoyama S. DOCK8 is a Cdc42 activator critical for interstitial dendritic cell migration during immune responses Blood 119 2012 4451 4461 22461490
114 Kearney C.J. Vervoort S.J. Ramsbottom K.M. Freeman A.J. Michie J. Peake J. Casanova J.-L. Picard C. Tangye S.G. Ma C.S. Johnstone R.W. Randall K.L. Oliaro J. DOCK8 drives Src-dependent NK cell effector function J. Immunol. 199 2017 2118 2127
115 Biggs C.M. Keles S. Chatila T.A. DOCK8 deficiency: Insights into pathophysiology, clinical features and management Clin. Immunol. 181 2017 75 82 28625885
116 Kearney C.J. Randall K.L. Oliaro J. DOCK8 regulates signal transduction events to control immunity Cell. Mol. Immunol. 14 2017 406 411 28366940
117 Schneider C. Shen C. Gopal A.A. Douglas T. Forestell B. Kauffman K.D. Rogers D. Artusa P. Zhang Q. Jing H. Freeman A.F. Barber D.L. King I.L. Saleh M. Wiseman P.W. Migration-induced cell shattering due to DOCK8 deficiency causes a type 2-biased helper T cell response Nat. Immunol. 21 2020 1528 1539 33020661
118 Namekata K. Guo X. Kimura A. Arai N. Harada C. Harada T. DOCK8 is expressed in microglia, and it regulates microglial activity during neurodegeneration in murine disease models J. Biol. Chem. 294 2019 13421 13433 31337702
119 Xu X. Han L. Zhao G. Xue S. Gao Y. Xiao J. Zhang S. Chen P. Wu Z. Ding J. Hu R. Wei B. Wang H. LRCH1 interferes with DOCK8-Cdc42–induced T cell migration and ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis J. Exp. Med. 214 2017 209 226 28028151
120 Namekata K. Guo X. Kimura A. Azuchi Y. Kitamura Y. Harada C. Harada T. Roles of the DOCK-D family proteins in a mouse model of neuroinflammation J. Biol. Chem. 295 2020 6710 6720 32241915
121 Parrado A. Expression of DOCK9 and DOCK11 analyzed with commercial antibodies: Focus on regulation of mutually exclusive first exon isoforms Antibodies (Basel) 9 2020 27
122 Ruiz-Lafuente N. Minguela A. Parrado A. DOCK9 induces membrane ruffles and Rac1 activity in cancer HeLa epithelial cells Biochem. Biophys. Rep. 14 2018 178 181 29872750
123 Dai W. Jin X. Han L. Huang H. Ji Z. Xu X. Tang M. Jiang B. Chen W. Exosomal lncRNA DOCK9-AS2 derived from cancer stem cell-like cells activated Wnt/β-catenin pathway to aggravate stemness, proliferation, migration, and invasion in papillary thyroid carcinoma Cell Death Dis. 11 2020 743 32917852
124 Kang M.-G. Nuriya M. Guo Y. Martindale K.D. Lee D.Z. Huganir R.L. Proteomic analysis of α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate receptor complexes J. Biol. Chem. 287 2012 28632 28645 22753414
125 Davies B. Brown L.A. Cais O. Watson J. Clayton A.J. Chang V.T. Biggs D. Preece C. Hernandez-Pliego P. Krohn J. Bhomra A. Twigg S.R.F. Rimmer A. Kanapin A. WGS500 Consortium A point mutation in the ion conduction pore of AMPA receptor GRIA3 causes dramatically perturbed sleep patterns as well as intellectual disability Hum. Mol. Genet. 26 2017 3869 3882 29016847
126 Yelo E. Bernardo M.V. Gimeno L. Alcaraz-García M.J. Majado M.J. Parrado A. Dock10, a novel CZH protein selectively induced by interleukin-4 in human B lymphocytes Mol. Immunol. 45 2008 3411 3418 18499258
127 Ruiz-Lafuente N. Minguela A. Muro M. Parrado A. The role of DOCK10 in the regulation of the transcriptome and aging Heliyon 5 2019 e01391
128 Nishikimi A. Meller N. Uekawa N. Isobe K. Schwartz M.A. Maruyama M. Zizimin2: A novel, DOCK180-related Cdc42 guanine nucleotide exchange factor expressed predominantly in lymphocytes FEBS Lett. 579 2005 1039 1046 15710388
129 Sakabe I. Asai A. Iijima J. Maruyama M. Age-related guanine nucleotide exchange factor, mouse Zizimin2, induces filopodia in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells Immun. Ageing 9 2012 2 22494997
130 Sakamoto A. Matsuda T. Kawaguchi K. Takaoka A. Maruyama M. Involvement of Zizimin2/3 in the age-related defect of peritoneal B-1a cells as a source of anti-bacterial IgM Int. Immunol. 29 2017 431 438 29099971
131 Sakamoto A. Maruyama M. Contribution of DOCK11 to the expansion of antigen-specific populations among germinal center B cells Immunohorizons 4 2020 520 529 32878909
132 Rudolph M.G. Wittinghofer A. Vetter I.R. Nucleotide binding to the G12V-mutant of Cdc42 investigated by X-ray diffraction and fluorescence spectroscopy: Two different nucleotide states in one crystal Protein Sci. 8 1999 778 787 10211824
133 Ostrem J.M.L. Shokat K.M. Direct small-molecule inhibitors of KRAS: From structural insights to mechanism-based design Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 15 2016 771 785 27469033
134 Goldberg J. Structural basis for activation of ARF GTPase: Mechanisms of guanine nucleotide exchange and GTP–myristoyl switching Cell 95 1998 237 248 9790530
135 Collins P.M. Douangamath A. Talon R. Dias A. Brandao-Neto J. Krojer T. von Delft F. Achieving a good crystal system for crystallographic X-ray fragment screening Methods Enzymol. 610 2018 251 264 30390801
136 Thomas S.E. Collins P. James R.H. Mendes V. Charoensutthivarakul S. Radoux C. Abell C. Coyne A.G. Floto R.A. von Delft F. Blundell T.L. Structure-guided fragment-based drug discovery at the synchrotron: Screening binding sites and correlations with hotspot mapping Philos. Trans. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 377 2019 20180422 31030650
137 Gray J.L. Antunez C.J. Krojer T. Fairhead M. Talon R. Burgess-Brown N. Goody R. Delft F.V. Brennan P.E. Human Kalirin/RAC1 GEF/GTPase Complex 2019 Zenodo
138 Liu X. Li F. Pan Z. Wang W. Wen W. Solution structure of the SH3 domain of DOCK180 Proteins 81 2013 906 910 23239367

