
==== Front
Toxicol Rep
Toxicol Rep
Toxicology Reports
2214-7500
Elsevier

S2214-7500(21)00085-8
10.1016/j.toxrep.2021.04.009
Regular Article
Worldwide flavor enhancer monosodium glutamate combined with high lipid diet provokes metabolic alterations and systemic anomalies: An overview
Banerjee Arnab
Mukherjee Sandip
Maji Bithin Kumar bm_scp@yahoo.in
*
Department of Physiology (UG & PG), Serampore College, 9 William Carey Road, Serampore, Hooghly, 712201, West Bengal, India
⁎ Corresponding author. bm_scp@yahoo.in
29 4 2021
2021
29 4 2021
8 938961
24 9 2020
20 4 2021
25 4 2021
© 2021 The Authors
2021
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Graphical abstract

Highlights

• Flavor enhancing high lipid diet acts as silent killer.

• Monosodium glutamate mixed with high lipid diet alters redox-status.

• Monosodium glutamate mixed with high lipid diet induces systemic anomalies.

In this fast-food era, people depend on ready-made foods and engage in minimal physical activities that ultimately change their food habits. Majorities of such foods have harmful effects on human health due to higher percentages of saturated fatty acids, trans-fatty acids, and hydrogenated fats in the form of high lipid diet (HLD). Moreover, food manufacturers add monosodium glutamate (MSG) to enhance the taste and palatability of the HLD. Both MSG and HLD induce the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and thereby alter the redox-homeostasis to cause systemic damage. However, MSG mixed HLD (MH) consumption leads to dyslipidemia, silently develops non-alcoholic fatty liver disease followed by metabolic alterations and systemic anomalies, even malignancies, via modulating different signaling pathways. This comprehensive review formulates health care strategies to create global awareness about the harmful impact of MH on the human body and recommends the daily consumption of more natural foods rich in antioxidants instead of toxic ingredients to counterbalance the MH-induced systemic anomalies.

Keywords

Food habits
Monosodium glutamate
High lipid diet
Human health
Harmful effects
Edited by Dr. A.M. Tsatsaka
==== Body
1 Introduction

Taste perception plays a vital role in regulating food preference, eating patterns, and homeostatic energy balance control. Various factors modulate the gustation [1]. All over the world, unnecessary modification of food habits and delicious food are directly associated with general people’s health issues. Nowadays, people are busy with their technology-based busy work schedules in different sectors, industries, and companies. In such a fast-paced life, they have very minimal time preparing their meals and engaging in physical activities [2]. For these reasons, most of them are dependent on “ready-made foods” or “junk foods” either from the canteen or nearby cafeterias or street-side local restaurants or Dhaba. Such habits ultimately change their food habits. Most of the “ready-made foods” contain high amounts of saturated fatty acids like palmitic acid, lauric acid, myristic acid. Thus, in combination with trans-fatty acids and hydrogenated fats, oxidative stress (OS) can result in inflammation to alter the redox-status and apoptosis, followed by metabolic disorders and systemic damage [[3], [4], [5]]. Such foods are preferred by all age groups because of their taste, effortless preparation, ease of consumption. These foods have saturated fatty acids and hydrogenated fats, which prevent the foods from rancidity without refrigeration. Such foods are considered unhealthy because of low nutritional value, and it is also known as junk food [[6], [7], [8]]. However, to increase taste and palatability, food producers use monosodium glutamate (MSG) [9]. This savory taste sensation of MSG escalates the attraction towards the specific type of foods or food products. As per the earlier survey report, globally, Asia is the stockpile of MSG production. Moreover, the consumption of MSG in the diet is higher in the Middle East and Africa than in Europe, North America, Central and South America [10]. Besides using MSG in junk food or ready-made foods, MSG is present in a wide variety of protein-rich foods like Roquefort, meat, Parmesan, fish, mushrooms, broccoli, tomatoes, etc. Additionally, an earlier study suggested that the human body cannot differentiate added MSG from naturally occurring glutamate in the diet. Moreover, umami taste sensation is also highly found in protein-rich foods [11]. On the other hand, saturated fats are present in protein-rich food like hamburgers, and fried chicken, which is also considered junk food [12]. Frozen entrees, canned tuna, crackers, processed meats, soups, dietary supplements, cosmetics, salad dressings, infant formula, vaccines, and other food products also contain MSG as a food seasoning chemical. MSG also applies to process the free glutamic acid that has been freed from protein through a manufacturing process of different cosmetics and other products. Moreover, in vaccines MSG has also been used as as preservative and stabilizer, to keep the vaccines effective through temperature and shelf life [10]. Ready-made foods or junk foods become more and more popular among people with the arrival of pizza, hamburgers, fried chicken, chips, hot dog, pakora, Chinese stir-fried noodles, French fries, cheese chili, pav bhaji, momo, and some other snacks and “spicy yummy” food items either from local restaurants or cafeteria [3,8,12]. Previously, researchers proposed that there is a positive relationship between fast-food restaurants and obesity [3]. Based on a survey report by the Institute of Food Technologists, about 75 % of Americans are dependent on 50 % of fast-food from local restaurants during meals, including dinner time [6]. Another study showed a positive correlation between metabolic disorders and MSG among Thailand’s rural people [13]. Nowadays, there has been a radical change in food habits in the USA, Canada, Britain, Australia, Japan, Sweden, and India [6,12]. About 40 % of the industries are concerned with the preparation of fast-food per year in India. Every year 2.1 % of India's total expenditure is spent on fast-food, and India ranks tenth in statistics. An earlier study showed that ready-made foods with a lack of physical activities could harm the lives of many people worldwide in the next coming ten years [6]. According to the demand of the people worldwide, fast-food restaurants, cafeterias, and the chain are increasing rapidly [12]. It ultimately leads to an increased risk of obesity, dyslipidemia, diabetes, metabolic disorders, non-alcoholic fatty liver diseases, steatosis of the liver, cardiovascular disease, and many other chronic health problems [3]. Western dietary patterns with consumption of ready-made foods regularly are the global burden of different metabolic disorders. The present study aims to review the current evidence about MSG mixed HLD (MH) adverse effects on human health. A recent study by Banerjee et al. [14] stated that MSG mixed HLD provokes serious hepato-cardiac anomalies by altering redox-equilibrium, inflammatory response, and programmed cell death, activating NF-kB and mitochondrial caspase-mediated pathway [14]. To confirm the relation between inflammation, redox imbalance, metabolic disarray, this study was well corroborated with earlier investigations [[15], [16], [17]]. However, there is little information available on chronic human consumption of MH-associated systemic anomalies. Hence, we have attempted to review and understand the possible health impact of such junk foods. It may help formulate health care strategies and create global awareness regarding the harmful effects of regularly using seasoning substances like MSG in HLD.

2 Modern diets, food habits, and health problems

In today's world, people devote very little time to prepare their own meals and are mainly dependent on ready-made foods with poor dietetic values that are unhealthy for human beings [8,9]. Over the past few years, regular consumption of chemically processed foods with food additives has remarkably increased in the Western world. This type of food triggered addictiveness towards specific foods [18,19]. Industrially processed foods are responsible for higher intakes of fast-foods per the survey report of national representative INCA3 in France [20]. Globally, there is a positive link between the consumption of such kinds of food and their impact on human health [18]. Fast-foods are made more attractive by adding food additives, synthetic food colors to upheld flavor, texture and by enhancing their long shelf life [21]. Increased shelf life due to the presence of saturated fatty acids and hydrogenated fats, which resists rancidity [3] with various food additives but mostly monosodium glutamate [21]. According to Banerjee et al. (2020), ready-made foods contains a mixture of saturated fats, hydrogenated or partially hydrogenated fats. These foods can stimulate taste and upheld appetite centers with different toxic effects on experimental animals and humans [3]. Subsequently, MSG consumption leads to disruption of energy balance and disturbs the leptin-mediated hypothalamus signaling pathway, leading to obesity [22,23]. Bawaskar et al. [24] demonstrated that consumption of fast-food rich in MSG causes several symptoms like burning sensation in different parts of the body, blistering on arms, occasionally on the anterior thorax, weakness, fatigue, and palpitations just after 20 min of taking meal [24].

Modification or changes in food habits play a pivotal role in developing chronic diseases. Moreover, sedentary behavior and regular consumption of unhealthy fast-foods are other significant factors that stimulate the progression of various chronic diseases such as obesity, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, food poisoning, dehydration, cardiac problems, arthritis, stroke, and cancer [8,25]. Unfortunately, we have adapted to a system of eating foods with several adverse effects on our health. Due to lifestyle changes and busy work schedules, people have minimal time to think about nutrition and fitness. Due to globalization, people have been forced to change their food habits and dietary patterns and consume high-calorie-made fast-foods regularly [21]. Nowadays, regular consumption of such unhealthy foods and their adverse effects on ordinary people become a global health problem. To overcome the issue, proper health education about the hazardous impact of such foods or food products, food habits, and a guideline on healthy eating practice for a better life. Fig. 1 shows the common factor in ready-made foods or junk food.Fig. 1 Common factor in ready-made foods or junk food.

Fig. 1

3 MSG, used as a flavor-enhancing agent, causes systemic anomalies

MSG has been used as a flavor-enhancing chemical and an umami tastant [18]. It might have a pathophysiological and toxicological impact on human health [26,27]. Umami’s taste intensifies the meaty, savory flavor of food, just like glutamate does in foods. The universal use of MSG is not less than 100 years for its use as a food seasoning chemical. The metabolism of naturally occurring glutamate occurs in the gut by exopeptidase during hydrolysis of protein in humans [28]. MSG contains hydrolyzed vegetable protein that stimulates orosensory receptors and acts as a flavor enhancer chemical by enhancing foods’ palatability. Excessive use of MSG induces obesity by influencing the appetite center. Earlier reports suggested that very minimal dose (i.e., 0.6 and 1.6 mg/g body weight for two weeks or 100−500 mg/kg body weight for three weeks) of MSG has deleterious effects on human and experimental animals [11,29,30]. Furthermore, it is not easy to conduct an experimental trial to identify the chronic toxicity of MSG in humans as there are several complications, ethical implications, and dietary instructions. But rodent models are very productive models for measuring excitotoxic neurotransmission in mammals [31]. For this reason, the majority of the review articles are on rodent models.

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the United States and European Food Safety Association (EFSA) report that MSG is safe and that it should be maintained on the “Generally Recognized as Safe” (GRAS)-list of foods. Apart from the various food additives used in the preparation of fast-foods, EFSA sets an acceptable daily intake (ADI) of 30 mg/kg/day for universally used flavor-enhancing chemical MSG, while the no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) has been set at 3200 mg/kg body weight of an individual (Committee on Toxicity of Chemicals in Food, Consumer Products, and the Environment, 2006) [11]. MSG is thus reportedly permitted as a safe food additive that needs no specified average, daily intake, or an upper limit intake requirement [32]. But there are various reports which show the opposite inference from their results. Besides, to investigate the effect of MSG on different animal models, an earlier study showed that the median lethal dose (LD50) of MSG is about 15 g/kg body weight in the murine model. However, it is 18 g/kg body weight, and the LD50 of salt is 3 g/kg body weight in rats which is approximately five folds lower than the LD50 value of MSG [28]. Moreover, out of two isomers of MSG, the first one is l-glutamate and the second one is d-glutamate enantiomer, respectively. l-glutamate enantiomers only exert flavor-enhancing properties. But, various companies prepared MSG with 99.6 % of naturally predominant l-glutamate form to enhance the flavor in fast-food for their marketing purpose, which is greater than the free glutamate ions found in natural foods [33].

Flavor enhancers can offer taste modification in different ready-made foods by using China salt or Ajinomoto. Immense use of MSG leads to systemic damages in different ways. Monosodium glutamate binds to the glutamate receptor and alters the signaling cascade of the hypothalamus. It also disrupts leptin’s action, increases the palatability of food, increases pro-inflammatory cytokines like IL (interleukin)-6 and TNF (tumor necrosis factor)-α, impairs glucose tolerance, increases insulin, leptin, and resistin, respectively. These altered factors ultimately lead to obesity [34]. Insulin resistance (IR) and diabetes have also been associated with the activation of inflammatory mediators like C-reactive protein (CRP), IL-1β, TNF-α and IL-6 in blood and adipose tissue. However, it is speculated that c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)/activator protein 1 (AP1) and IkB kinase (IKK)/nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-kB) might play an essential predominantly role in MSG-induced inflammation by the influence of pro-inflammatory mediators, free fatty acids and ROS. Thus, the production of ROS stimulates adverse effects on the insulin signaling pathway. Moreover, adipose tissue plays a vital role in inflammation and IR in obese conditions via the secretion of specific chemokines, cytokines, and adipocytokines; furthermore, insulin sensitivity is regulated adipocytokines on skeletal muscle and hepatocytes [35].

Monosodium glutamate causes Chinese restaurant syndrome (CRS) by showing some symptoms like back neck burn, blistering on arms, anterior thorax, flushing, dizziness, syncope, and facial pressure, which occur just 20 min after taking a ready-made foods rich in MSG [24]. Neurotoxin releases from the patient with CRS also lead to Alzheimer’s disease, brain tumor, schizophrenia, dementia, anxiety, Tourette syndrome, Huntington disease, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy, etc. Moreover, the binding of MSG to glutamate receptors also disrupt stromal cells and basement membrane, cellular hypertrophy of the ovarian theca follicular, OS, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) damage, protein modification, and some other reproductive abnormalities [34]. Fast-food containing Ajinomoto could produce some alarming symptoms like weakness, flushing, numbness, dizziness, sweating, and headaches, leading to various other complications, including urticaria, asthma, and ventricular arrhythmia, atopic dermatitis, abdominal discomfort, and neuropathy also [36]. Another study proposed that MSG intake is directly associated with higher hemoglobin levels in males than females in the Chinese population. Since leptin plays a vital role in generating cellular components of blood and blood plasma, the effect of MSG on hemoglobin might be accompanied by leptin [15,16,37].

Onakewhor et al. [38] suggested that MSG has a significant toxicological impact on the testis by resulting low count of sperm in the semen and a high count of abnormal sperm in a rat model by dose-dependent manner [38]. Testicular damage, loss of functions, altered structure, and reduction in the population of sperm ultimately lead to male-infertility [39]. Besides, MSG has also cause degeneration of the retina, damage of brain cells, endocrine disorders, and pathological conditions like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, schizophrenia, anxiety, depression, brain trauma, addiction, neuropathic pain, stroke, etc. [40].

Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter, and mostly the excitotoxicity is mediated by NMDA receptors as in neuroinflammatory demyelinating and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. MSG in ready-made foods has also been linked to nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, asthma, urticaria, neoplastic cell growth, and differentiation [41]. MSG as a food additive also causes angioedema and urticaria in randomized controlled trials in humans [36,42]. According to Beyreuther et al. [43], consumption of 16.0 mg/kg of body weight of MSG is considered safe [43]. Nowadays, the application of MSG in different foods was used as compared to the safe level (e.g., 400 mg to 14 g per day) [13]; in the United Kingdom for the general population, the average consumption of MSG was 580 mg per day of an individual and 4.68 g per day for maximal customers [44]. It was reported that every 100 g of Chinese foods contains about 10 mg to 1.5 g of MSG by a joint investigation team of Australia and New Zealand Government in 2003 [45]. Additionally, MSG induced cardiac tissue architecture damage, altered cardiac rhythm associated with biochemical changes, metabolic changes, overweight, liver toxicity, fibrosis, alteration in average growth of cells (i.e., neoplastic), and neuronal damage [11]. Moreover, MSG can alter the behavioral pattern or violent behavior, decreased movements, and reduced muscle strength like a physiological response [46]. Earlier studies also suggested that elevated levels of lipid peroxidation with increased concentration of nitrite and reduced antioxidants levels alter the neuronal redox homeostasis, the hippocampus’s neuronal architecture, increased cholinesterase levels in the brain and serum [47,48]. Fig. 2 shows the overall deleterious impact of MSG.Fig. 2 MSG induced metabolic alteration associated deleterious impact on different system.

Fig. 2

3.1 Effects of MSG on the central nervous system (CNS)

In mammals, excitatory neurotransmitters like glutamate play a significant role in the different processes related to physiology and pathology in the central nervous system [49]. Accumulating evidence suggests that higher aggressiveness is observed in the animals, which could be due to the overactivation of glutamate pathways linked with lower γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) levels for the functions of CNS [46,50], and free radical-mediated dopaminergic neurodegeneration decreases locomotor activity [50]. MSG is also linked with disturbance in the balance between endogenous antioxidant (EA) and free radicals (FRs) and fails to maintain the antioxidant defense homeostasis, loss of membrane integrity and function of neurons, intensified different ions permeability nonspecifically, and pathological alterations of intracellular metabolic pathways [50]. Additionally, MSG has also been linked with cell death, decreased photoreceptor and glial cells in infant mammals’ neurons [51]. On the other hand, MSG incites flavor-preference learning by activating celiac and gastric branches of the 10th cranial nerve to further activate the insula and insular lobe, hypothalamus, limbic system, and nucleus tractus solitarius [52]. We suggest that the research should focus on the impact of MSG on CNS with the gastrointestinal signaling cascade.

Besides, MSG has been associated with several modifications in the hippocampus by downregulation of cyclic 5′ adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and upregulation of pro-apoptotic Fas ligand, Bax [48,53]. Moreover, MSG also altered the histomorphology of hippocampal neuronal damage in the cerebral cortex and cerebellum in the rodent model [47,50]. Onaolapo et al. [47] showed that total brain glutamate or glutamine level correlates with glutamate and glutamine in plasma in a murine model [47].

Additionally, mammals have the ability to metabolize large dose of MSG; but, glutamate concentrations in plasma fluctuate during the day and lead to an altered diet, metabolism, and protein turnover [54]. In this context, it has been revealed that the application of lower oral doses could produce altered histomorphological architecture of the brain.

In addition, Walker and Lupien [55] stated that primates, dogs are at lower risk of MSG than the immature blood-brain barrier (BBB) of pups [55]. In contrast, altered plasma glutamate has no such effect on the BBB in adult rodents [11]. However, the nervous structures without BBB like dorsal root ganglia, circumventricular organs, and autonomic ganglia are at risk to acute fluctuations of large magnitude [56]. Body of evidence suggests that an MSG-rich diet alters the cerebrum’s neurochemicals, hippocampus, and cerebellum in adult mammals.

3.2 Impact of MSG on the cardiovascular system

Earlier evidence suggested that the administration of MSG in a certain period leads to OS in the heart with elevated levels of cardiac marker enzymes like lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate transaminase (AST), and alanine transaminase (ALT) [57,58]. In rats with myocardial infarction, MSG induced alteration of the cardiac rhythmic pattern and also tachyarrhythmia [59] in a dose-dependent manner. Researchers performed these experiments that indicate a threat to human health in higher doses (safer limit of MSG used is approximately 16 mg/kg body weight, thereby crossing the boundary has been taken as a higher dose of MSG consumption) and selecting the route of administration respectively. Because the route of administration like intraperitoneal, intravenous and subcutaneous doses are a little bit higher than the human dietary intake [13,43,60], the common metabolic pathways of consumable glutamate cross by these routes [11]. On the other hand, Konrad et al. (2012) proposed that MSG-induced obesity also associates with hypertension, bradycardia, and vagal-sympathetic effects [297]. Moreover, MSG-induced obesity developed by the extra-fats accumulation in adipose tissue due to cholesterol up-regulation ultimately leads to cardiovascular disorders [62]. A significant observation reported by Geha et al. [36] that eating ready-made Chinese foods produced a noticeably rapid heart rate with some other symptoms in humans (e.g., CRS) [36].

From the above reports, it was put forward that MSG-induced cardiac anomaly occurred by altering the cardiac marker enzymes, dyslipidemia, disturbed the balance between free radicals and antioxidants levels, OS, necrosis of cardiomyocytes, cardiac arrhythmia. Still, for better understanding the molecular mechanism of action of MSG-induced cardiac damage and involvement of the proper pathway, further studies are required.

3.3 Destructive effects of MSG on the hepatic system

Regular intakes of MSG have been linked with impaired membrane permeability, leads to hepatic fibrosis via distortion of hepatocytes, central vein dilation, lysis of red blood cells, degenerative changes with vacuolation, infiltration of cells in rodents model [11]. However, Takai et al. [63] have reported that MSG causes hyperinsulinemia, hypercholesterolemia, cellular infiltration of eosinophils, lymphocytes, neutrophils, plasmacytes, mast cells, and macrophages, accumulation of liposome in the hepatocytes which finally lead to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) in a murine model [63]. Moreover, obesity-induced steatosis and inflammatory response in the liver by MSG lead to hepatocellular carcinoma [64,65]. Additionally, pathogenic activation of Kupffer cells linked with innate effector cells in the damaged hepatocytes and early infiltration of monocytes promote hepatic tissue damage with higher expression of inflammatory M1 macrophages [63,66].

However, human non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and NASH are caused by the higher MSG consumption in overweight and diabetes patients [67]. On the other hand, Waer and Edress [68] showed that increased MSG intake increases liver glycogen, free fatty acids, phospholipids, and triglycerides content by producing hyperlipidemic conditions. Such elevated glycogen levels in the liver may be due to the high blood sugar and insulin levels [68]. Accumulating evidence suggested that MSG induced OS via disturbing the redox equilibrium by escalating lipid peroxidation with decreasing the endogenous antioxidant levels, which stimulated the generation of collagen fiber in the liver [58,68,69].

Some group of researchers documented that MSG-induced dyslipidemia alters LDL/HDL ratio with the obese condition, increased adiposity without hyperphagic response, hyperinsulinemia by increased insulin level, fibrosis, and steatosis in rodants model [58,70]. Moreover, some studies demonstrated that MSG induced hepatocellular injury via altered liver metabolism via increasing production of aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, and gamma-glutamyl transferase followed by inflammation, deterioration of bile ducts, steatosis, infiltration of lymphocytes, monocytes, and macrophages with fibrosis and neoplastic alterations, nodular lesions [11]. Besides, El-Meghawry El-Kenawy et al. [71] also proposed that MSG induced hepatocellular apoptosis via up-regulation of apoptotic mediator proteins such as ki-67and p53 with altered histomorphology of liver, a structural anomaly in mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum with karyopyknosis which undergoing apoptosis [71]. It is not clear whether there is an association between MSG-enriched foods or diets and hepatocellular toxicity. Therefore, further studies are required to regularly explore the impact of dietary MSG equivalent to human intake as part of an ingredient in ready-made foods on the hepatic system.

3.4 Destructive effects of MSG on the reproductive system

On fertility and development of the fetus, logical safety issues arise by preclinical studies on the impact of flavor-enhancing chemicals (i.e., MSG) on chronic exposure to animal models. Previously, researchers showed that MSG altered the typical histomorphological architecture of the testis are associated with various abnormalities in sperm [72]. On the other hand, MSG is also positively linked with altered oocytes and fallopian tubes in rodent models [73,74]. A recent study by Mondal et al. [​75​] demonstrated that the consumption of MSG in daily diet has a higher chance of impaired spermatogenesis with higher pachynema in primary spermatocytes and increased primary follicles [75]. Moreover, few other studies documented the harmful quantity in MSG effects on a female reproductive system by ovarian disturbances such as impaired vacuolation of stroma cells, and basement membrane increased in cell size of theca follicular, endosalpinx detached from mesosalpinx [73,74].

In males, the primary sex organ is the most sensitive in the body, more prone to be affected by hazardous environmental factors [76]. Xenobiotic compounds like MS are linked with reduced testosterone [77], altered testicular architecture, testicular hemorrhage, oligospermia with a higher risk of male infertility [78,79]. A recent investigation by Rahimi et al. [9] proposed that MSG induced apoptosis of germ cells in male primary sex organs is responsible for DNA damage via incorporation of labeled 2′-deoxyuridine, 5′-triphosphate (dUTP) at sites of fragmented DNA in a rat model, but the apoptosis was higher in primary spermatocytes than spermatogonia [9]. Earlier reports showed that subtype of metabotropic glutamates (mGlu) receptors such as mGlu1 and mGlu5 are present in testes of animals, humans, and sperm of humans [78,79]. Further activation of cellular development, stability, and distinction-related processes activate calcium (Ca2+) waves into the cells via mGlu5 activation since higher amounts of glutamate from the MSG further stimulate glutamate receptors. On the contrary, higher intracellular Ca2+ further enters and activates different cellular organelles (e.g., nucleus, mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum), proteases, and caspases lead to activation of the apoptotic pathway by the consumption of MSG [9].

During pregnancy, MSG consumption induces obesity with downregulation of growth hormones, insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), reduces IntelliCage place learning and cue discrimination, impairs seizure threshold [80,81]. Moreover, uterine exposure to MSG also altered cerebral morphology and functions by up-regulation of pro-apoptotic genes and thereby genotoxicity in infants [81]. Therefore, from the above evidence, it can reveal that MSG exerted diverse effects on both male and female reproductive systems, but further studies are required for the chronic exposure of MSG on the reproductive system and fetus development with the human equivalent dose of MSG.

3.5 Harmful effects of MSG on the excretory system

Kidneys are the central organ in the excretory system, removing toxic materials from the body and regulating the balance between fluid and electrolytes’ quantity in the body. Globally chronic kidney disease (CKD) is identified as a salient noncommunicable disorder; additionally, gut microbiota plays a crucial role in protecting human health, but the gut microbiota’s alteration of the gut microbiota is associated with foods and chronic diseases like CKD [82]. However, Megamonas, Faecalibacterium, Blautia in gut microbiota are decreased by ingestion of MSG mixed diet simultaneously with an increase of Collinsella [83]. On the other hand, the last stage of the patients with CKD lacks Faecalibacterium, which is also associated with decreased glomerular filtration rate [83,84].

A significant risk factor of CKD is an unhealthy diet mixed with MSG, which led to obstructive nephropathy, including complete or incomplete blockage of kidneys with a reduced level of stone inhibitors (e.g., citrate, magnesium, etc.) followed by alkalinization of urine [82,85]. In the kidney cell, MSG triggers catabolism of glutamate and forms carbon dioxide (CO2) and after that bicarbonate (HCO3−) respectively; therefore, absorption of HCO3- in the circulation causes drainage of excess alkali by the kidney and thereby leads to alkalinization of urine which promotes nephrolithiasis with hydronephrosis [85]. Further, it develops OS, which induced the modification of the fibroblasts into myofibroblast [86] and thereby CKD via the activation of heat shock cognate 71 kDa (e.g., Hspa8 or HSC 70; HSC 70 is the primary inducer of OS) due to inactivation of glutathione-S-transferase [[87], [88], [89], [90]]. Accumulating evidence suggests that OS provokes renal toxicity induced by MSG through N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors (NMDAR) via Ca2+ [87,91]. Furthermore, an earlier study proposed that upregulation of NR1 and NR2C subunit of NMDAR linked with nephrotoxicity [92]; glycine and glutamate act as agonistically on NMDAR and stimulates them to produce cell death [93]. Moreover, activation of NMDAR for an extended period of time induced altered intracellular Ca2+ dynamics, which stimulates different cellular activities such as nitric oxide synthase and protein kinase C activation [94,95]. Therefore, it can further stimulate the production of free radicals (FA), and oxidative degradation of lipids promoted OS and cellular damage [96]. Additionally, cystine-glutamate chloride-dependent antiporter (CGCDA) regulates the nonvesicular glutamate release, but inhibition of CGCDA leads to reduced intracellular glutathione and thereby ferroptosis [[97], [98], [99]].

A study based on proteomic analysis by Sharma et al. [90] identifies that a higher rate of the Krebs cycle is associated with an increased level of glutamate on the consumption of regular MSG rich diet due to a high level of α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, which also leads to OS in cells of the kidney [90]. OS in the urinary system occurs due to uncontrolled metabolism of glutamate for an extended period of time which triggers ROS generation and higher production of free radicals with insufficient endogenous antioxidants, which leads to nephrotoxicity and cellular damage in the renal system [88,89,100,101].

Moreover, cytoplasmic phosphoserine phosphatase (PSP) belongs to the hydrolases class of enzymes, which acts on phosphoric monoester bonds to form serine and phosphate from o-phosphoserine. Pyruvate, cysteine, and glycine are produced from the metabolism of serine in which other than pyruvate, the rest two acts as the precursor molecules for the synthesis of glutathione [90]. Moreover, Sharma et al. [​90​] also report that MSG-induced negative regulation of PSP in the renal system also impairs glutathione synthesis [90]. Furthermore, serine and glycine are the primary activators of the glutamate receptor activation, which gets impaired via the downregulation of the PSP in the kidney [102,103]. Additionally, the glycerophosphate shuttle has been activated by MSG via positive regulation of cytosolic glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PD), which helps transport cytosolic NADH and produced glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) in mitochondria. MSG-induced alteration of energy metabolism occurs via glycolysis, lipogenesis, and oxidative phosphorylation by G3P [104]. Therefore, glycolytic phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) acts as a negative regulator by MSG and reduces the catabolism of glucose. Moreover, PGK also plays an essential role in producing energy in the glycolytic pathway, and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) helps regulate this protein in the cell [90]. It can be speculated that, in the catabolism of tryptophan, the positive regulation of 2-amino-3-carboxymuconate-6-semialdehyde decarboxylase (ACMSD) by MSG might be a contributor to the catabolism of amino acid. ACMSD level was higher in MSG mixed high protein diet as compared to a regular healthy diet [105]. Therefore, a high level of glutamate triggers its catabolism, and it also takes part in MSG-induced overactivation of the average Krebs cycle via the up-regulation of α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (KGDH) and succinyl-CoA ligase (SCL) [90,106]. Overactivation of the Krebs cycle alters intracellular redox homeostasis. Excess glutamate also triggers the proton gradient in mitochondria; it results in Krebs cycle mediated overabundance of electron donors, leading to excessive superoxide production within the mitochondria [105]. As KGDH is an inducer of OS, it can also be postulated that the MSG-induced generation of ROS occurs via the escalated catabolism of amino acids and also up-regulation of KGDH [90]. Furthermore, Zhang et al. [107] report that SCL has also been indirectly associated with OS via the production of succinate, which further stimulates the production of hydrogen peroxide and thereby generates ROS in the excretory system [107].

Therefore, it is speculated that α-KGDH plays an essential role in MSG induced renal anomaly by overactivation of NMDAR, inhibition of CGCDA, hyperactivation of Krebs cycle by altering the expression of different proteins, which leads to OS and altered the beneficial gut microbiome that should be more vital points for the researcher in their future studies.

3.6 Effects of MSG on the immune system

in vitro study has been directly linked with the impact of MSG on the immune system by establishing embryonic cell culture models. There was no significant evidence on replication and nuclear division in MSG-induced chromosomal aberrations and exchange in sister chromatids on human lymphocytes. This report has observed that MSG induces genotoxicity on human peripheral blood lymphocytes at the cellular level [26]. Additionally, a higher concentration of MSG exerted a dose-dependent impact on the viability of B cells. According to Jovic et al. [108], metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR)-7 is associated with programmed cell death of naive B and memory cells respectively by glutamate [108]. Additionally, various glutamate receptors have been seen in native and memory lymphocytes. In immune cells, OS and apoptosis are seen by differential expression profiles of glutamate receptors [108]. MSG administration in newborn rats disturbs the balance between anti-inflammatory (AI) and pro-inflammatory (PI) cytokines in serum [109]. MSG increases corticotropic-adrenal response, insulin, triglyceride, and leptin levels in newborn rats in the course of an acute phase of inflammation stress. However, the pro-inflammatory cytokine was hindered with average anti-inflammatory cytokines level. From the above evidence, it can be inferred that MSG induced alteration in neuroendocrine-immune and metabolic functions [110]. Moreover, inflammation and damage in the lining of the small intestine are associated with changes in the absorption of lipid on intraduodenal administration of MSG [111]. The body’s defense mechanisms against some infectious diseases were altered by the administration of MSG after birth [112]. Moreover, MSG also causes a reduction of lymphocytes level in the blood without disturbing the basal phagocytosis of neutrophils [11]. However, the earlier reports have also been well documented that MSG is also linked with higher macrophage generation with their phagocytosis on the neonatal period [113]. Furthermore, MSG-induced proliferation in cells of the thymus by escalating the rate of programmed cell death is also linked with an increasing percentage of OS [11]. According to Pavlović et al. [​79​], increased levels of malondialdehyde (MDA), xanthine oxidase (XO), with decreased activity of catalase (CAT) is also associated with a higher rate of programmed cell death [79].

In addition, obstruction of macrophage inhibition leads to impairment of functions of delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) effector T cells for the investigation of DTH depression in MSG-fed murine model [114]. Another study on the murine model proposed the association between the reduced activities of natural killer cells with quantitatively lower populations of large granular lymphocytes [115]. However, there is no such evidence in human dietary exposure of MSG on the immune system. Therefore, the present review suggests designing an appropriate experimental setup to uncover human dietary exposure of MSG on immune system-related problems, if any.

3.7 Role of MSG in tumor progression

Glutamate receptors have also been found in lymphocytes, thymocytes, and some other non-neuronal cells [11]. Accumulating evidence suggested that MSG caused up-regulation of inflammatory cytokines with downregulation of adiponectin in chronic inflammation [116,117]. Moreover, upregulation of some pro-inflammatory factors like resistin, TNF-α, leptin, and IL-6 via peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α (PPAR-α) and PPAR-γ activation has also been observed in MSG-induced inflammation in a murine model [118]. Hernández-Bautista et al. [116] demonstrated that altered metabolic activities were also observed in the MSG-fed mouse model of obesity [116]. Moreover, previous studies well documented that MSG-induced obesity and diabetes are positive contributors towards NAFLD, leading to NASH with inflammation and development of primary tumor to hepatocellular carcinoma [64,65,67]. Additionally, cancer development has been linked with stimulated voltage-gated sodium channels, excitatory glutamate, and non-neuronal excitatory receptors mediated hyper-excitability of the cell [119]. Moreover, generation of ROS in the state of OS and abnormal metabolic formation of fat in the liver is correlated with overweight and syndrome-X, which are also identified during the development of hepatocellular carcinoma [11]. The pharmacokinetics of the drug were altered in MSG-induced obese mice via up-regulation mixed-function oxidases such as NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase one and UDP-glucuronosyltransferases 1A. Furthermore, antioxidant defense mechanism and chemoprotection were impaired by the reduced ability of glutathione S-transferases in an obese model [120,121], which either deactivate carcinogens or produce reactive species with increased reactivity contrasted to the primary compound. A recent report by Beyerle et al. [122] showed that there is an interconnection between colorectal cancer with the activities of glutathione S-transferase, cytochrome P450, UDP-glucuronosyltransferase in human [122]. Miyazaki et al. [​123​] showed that NASH-associated human hepatocellular carcinoma was also reflected by the diethylnitrosamine-induced hepatocellular tumor in MSG exposed murine model [123].

However, to investigate the relationship between colorectal carcinoma and MSG-induced obesity, Hata et al. [124] have also identified that MSG-induced obesity is at high risk for the development of azoxymethane-induced development of colon cancer via the up-regulation of IGF-1 receptor with an increased level of insulin, cholesterol and blood sugar respectively [124]. In malignant cells, this modified cellular signaling takes a significant part in the synthesis of ATP, controlled the utilization of energy, and sustain the redox equilibrium via the aerobic glycolysis of glucose in the tumor and glutaminase produced glutamate from glutamine; moreover, the citric acid cycle plays a vital role in the production of α-ketoglutarate from this glutamate [125]. Accumulating evidence proposed that enhancement of the obesity-associated tumorigenesis can happen via inhibiting programmed cell death and insulin-IR-ERK1/2 signaling cascade activation [126,127]. Therefore, we can infer that MSG is a positive promoter of initiation of malignancy and tumorigenesis. But further studies are required to explore the generation of tumor and tumorigenesis in humans by the human equivalent dose of dietary consumption of MSG in the diet with proper target pathway of the mechanism of action.

3.8 Other harmful impact associated with MSG

Higher incidence of syndrome X has been positively linked with 1 g higher consumption of MSG in the diet [13]. Besides the above pieces of evidence, MSG also exerts diverse destructive impact (Table 1) on human health, such as Type 2 diabetes, by activating N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) to disturb the functions of β-cell in the pancreas [128,129], hyperphagia, hyperleptinemia, and dyslipidemia by altered lipid profiles with increased leptin level [130,35,131], sleep-disordered breathing (SDB), increased chances of gastroesophageal reflux disease and mandibular retrognathia [43,132,133], etc. Moreover, MSG also de-activates normal thermogenesis processes in brown adipose tissue and thereby leads to altered regulation of thermogenesis [134]. Additionally, MSG has been directly associated with nociceptive responses such as temporomandibular joint (TMJ) syndrome, musculoskeletal pain [11], etc. Furthermore, MSG also acts as a pseudo-allergic chemical that ultimately leads to Chinese restaurant syndrome and exerts inflammatory responses in the human body [35,46,14].Table 1 Adverse impact of MSG along with target pathways in different human and animal models.

Table 1MSG induced anomalies	Target pathway	References	
Syndrome X	i. Alteration of insulin signaling
ii. Activation of ROS/OS-related pathway followed by alteration of redox equilibrium	i.[35]
ii.[11,35,65]	
Type 2 diabetes	i. Activation of N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) signaling and NMDARs mediated activation of NF-kB and NOD-like receptor family
ii. Insulin resistance (IR) and hyperinsulinemia
iii. High glycolytic flux via activation of Ras signaling
iv. Activation of the mitochondria-dependent apoptotic signaling cascade	i. [135,129]
ii. [136]
iii. [137,136]
iv. [129]	
Hyperphagia, hyperleptinemia and dyslipidemia	Altered metabolic activities, obesity, IR, increased levels of leptin or incompetent binding of leptin to its receptors and altered lipid profile	[35,130,131]	
Sleep-disordered breathing (SDB)	Obstruction in respiratory system and increase movement of gastrointestinal tract also leads to SDB via higher incidence of GERD	[43,132,133]	
De-activation of thermogenesis	Reduction of thermogenesis in BAT and thereby decreases the normal thermoregulatory mechanism	[134]	
Nociceptive response	Increase interstitial concentration of glutamate in the facial muscle with musculoskeletal disorders followed by nociceptive response	[35]	
Allergy, eczema and MSG symptom complex	MSG acts as pseudo allergens to cause allergic responses	[35,46,138,12]	

3.8.1 Syndrome X

A collection of diseases including obesity, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia, high blood pressure, diabetes steatosis of the liver and cardiovascular disorder (CVD) called metabolic syndrome [35]. Recently, some other names have been attached to it, such as insulin resistance syndrome, Reaven syndrome, dysmetabolic syndrome, and syndrome X (SX) [139]. Moreover, SX patients must have at least hypertension, high level of triglycerides, decreased level of ‘good cholesterol’ and elevated level of blood sugar, which were demonstrated by the American Heart Association, International Atherosclerosis Society, World Heart Federation, International Diabetes Federation, International Diabetes Federation, International Association for the Study of Obesity, and National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute; additionally altered insulin signaling in the brain and release of free fatty acids from adipose tissue also triggers glucose production in the liver and very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) simultaneously reduced the level of ‘good cholesterol’ [35]. Moreover, some factors including lack of physical activities, inflammatory response for the prolonged period, an elevated level of leptin, malfunction of mitochondria, genetic susceptibility, pancreatic dysfunction with the destruction of β-cells and increased level of free fatty acids, reduced uptake of glucose in skeletal muscle with higher production in the liver stimulated the progression of SX via alteration of insulin signaling [35]. However, MSG-induced generation of ROS altered the balance of antioxidant and free radical balance, and hepatic anomalies are also linked with the metabolic syndrome in the hepatocellular carcinoma model [11,35,65]. Accumulating pieces of evidence suggested that redox equilibrium, adipose tissue metabolism, endocrine glands, innate immunity, endothelial function, fibrinolysis, and coagulation-related anomaly have also been correlated with SX [35,140,141]. Furthermore, epidemiological surveys on humans also proposed that MSG in the diet also promoted SX [13].

3.8.2 Type 2 diabetes

Activation of NMDAR leads to failure of functions of the β-cell in the pancreas by reducing the mass of the β-cell, insulin secretion leads to type-2 diabetes due to the higher intake of glutamate [135]. Insulin resistance (IR) and hyperinsulinemia are responsible for developing obese neonatal rats exposed to MSG [136]. Furthermore, in hypertrophic islets of the pancreas, high glycolytic flux might be via Ras signaling activation [137] with upregulation of GLUT2 linked with hyperglycemia and diabetes [136].

Some other studies well demonstrated the hypertrophic, hyperplastic effects of MSG on islets of the pancreas with reduction of α-cells, δ-cells, and acinar cells [142]. Furthermore, a recent study by Boonnate et al. [​142​] proposed that MSG induced diabetes by reduction of mass of β-cell of the pancreas with higher production of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal in islets of the pancreas via oxidative stress [142]. However, fibrosis and β-cell destruction of the pancreas occurred by an increased level of extracellular glutamate [143]; it further diminished the cysteine precursor for the synthesis of glutathione by impeding the counter-transporter of glutamate-cysteine in β-cell of the pancreas and finally contributed to oxidative stress-mediated cell death [142]. Furthermore, excess glutamate in the body stimulated high glucose-induced overactivation of glutamatergic N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors (NMDARs), signaling mediated activation of NF-kB and NOD-like receptor family member pyrin domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasomes which diminished the function of β-cells in the pancreas by downregulation of transcription factors [128,129]. Moreover, it may also cause mitochondrial dysfunction, leading to programmed cell death via activation of the mitochondria-dependent apoptotic signaling cascade by up-regulation of pro-apoptotic and downregulation of anti-apoptotic protein [129]. Therefore, all evidence suggested that MSG induced chronic pancreatitis, failure of function of β-cells in the pancreas to promote diabetes, and thereby programmed cell death.

3.8.3 Hyperphagia, hyperleptinemia, and dyslipidemia

Hyperphagia is an inherited condition in which a person has an extreme desire to eat food without satisfaction [144]. Adipocytes released leptin that binds with the receptor situated in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, which incited such responses [145]. On the contrary, Afifi and Abbas [130] proposed that MSG induced hyperphagia by an increased leptin level in serum because of the incompetent binding of leptin to its receptors [130]. High serum leptin is also linked with the body mass index (BMI) and higher adiposity [146]. Moreover, MSG also altered metabolic activities related to hyperphagia with obesity which is also correlated with IR, increased levels of leptin (i.e., hyperleptinemia), and the altered ratio of bad cholesterol/good cholesterol (i.e., dyslipidemia) [35,131].

3.8.4 Sleep-disordered breathing (SDB)

Regular consumption of MSG mixed foods is linked with partial or complete cessation of breathing and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS), a global public health issue. Moreover, it could be a positive contributor to pulmonary disorders, cardiovascular disorders like morbid conditions. It occurred due to the obstruction of the pharynx or breathing pause or insufficient ventilation during the sleeping period and produced snoring without disturbing the sleep and depended upon an individual’s age and body weight. Furthermore, escalated movement of the gastrointestinal tract by MSG leads to the higher incidence of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), which also linked with OSA, are more common among Asians, according to their cranial architectural aspects and a higher rate of mandibular retrognathia [43,132,133].

3.8.5 De-activation of thermogenesis

Thermogenesis is a process of the generation of heat in animals or the human body. Very little information is available - although an earlier study proposed that MSG promoted significant loss of body temperature without mobilized brown adipose tissue (BAT) when exposed to the cold environment (e.g., 4 °C), depended on the exposure time in the murine model. They suggested that MSG blunted the mechanism of activation of thermogenesis in BAT and diminished the regular thermoregulatory tool for thermogenesis [134].

3.8.6 Nociceptive response

MSG exerts an adverse impact on human beings by escalating the interstitial concentration of glutamate in the facial muscle of mastication in patients with temporomandibular disorders and triggered the severity of pain sensation [35]. It has also been observed from a recent study by Vellisca and Latorre (2013) that a typical musculoskeletal pain was intensified by MSG in-patient with fibrositis [298]. On the contrary, a recent study proposed that MSG is directly linked with a high concentration of nitrates in the brain by decreasing the thermal nociceptive threshold [147]. Therefore, it can be proposed that there could be a possible link between intakes of MSG in ready-made foods with the nociceptive stimulus to intensify the pain sensation, and further studies are required to evaluate the long-term administration of the minimal dose of MSG on the nociceptive threshold.

3.8.7 Allergy, eczema, and MSG symptom complex

MSG-enriched foods cause burning and unusual pain sensation in the chest, emotional distress, migraines, atypical facial pain or pressure, stiffness of muscle, involuntary and temporary reddening of the skin, pins-and-needles sensation [42,44,148]. However, after consumption of ready-made foods mixed with MSG caused skin rashes, inflammation on the skin followed by reddening and thereby cracked skin, asthma, dysfunction of peripheral nerves (e.g., numbness, weakness), ventricular arrhythmia, abdominal irritations, and also CRS [12].

Additionally, eczema with chronic fluctuation of body temperature is a condition which supposed to be caused by consumption of MSG and other food additives-enriched diet; on the contrary, reduction of the use of food additives as pseudo allergens like MSG in the diet decreased the chance of such allergic reaction in the skin [35]. Furthermore, MSG acts as a pro-inflammatory mediator in the immune-linked pathogenesis of eczema [149,150]. Therefore, intake of MSG in foods or diet directly correlated with atopic dermatitis or eczema-like skin infections.

In addition, on the harmony of allergy and skin infection by the exposure of MSG mixed ready-made foods or junk food, Chinese restaurant syndrome (CRS) is also known as MSG symptom complex (MSC); precisely, a group of neurological syndromes similar to the MSG-induced allergic responses [46,138] arises just after twenty minutes of taking MSG mixed diet. But it did not occur in all kinds of people; it depends upon the MSG-sensitive person [62]. A recent report by Bawaskar et al. [24] proposed that without healthy-solid-diet with good nutritive value, higher consumption of MSG mixed foods with low nutritional value are directly associated with increased risk for the incidence of MSC [24].

4 Effects induced by HLD, as a central component of the modern diet, on human homeostasis

In today’s world, people often prefer a high lipid diet daily with very minimal physical activities. This has led to epidemically obese conditions and obesity-linked metabolic diseases [3]. Further, it can develop an imbalance of energy homeostasis and cause a burden on global diseases like dyslipidemia, hyperlipidemia, hyperglycemia, diabetes, liver-related problems, cardiovascular problems, OS, and cancer. However, not all the high lipid die ingredients are toxic; mainly the saturated fatty acids, trans-fatty acids, and hydrogenated fats are the main ingredients of an un-hygienic diet [3,151]. Besides the use of MSG, hydrogenated palm oil in vanaspati also acts as a flavor enhancer in different HLD [62]. Moreover, earlier studies in adults have shown that saturated fatty acids, trans-fatty acids containing diets are positively associated with increased low-density lipoprotein (LDL), total cholesterol (TC) mediated cardiovascular disorder [3], coronary heart disease, and increased the mortality rate [152]. Generally, coronary heart disease and cardiovascular disorders are observed in older age; dyslipidemia and other cardiovascular diseases in older people are directly linked with the previous atherosclerotic lesions in coronary arteries and aorta in childhood [153]. In childhood, increased TC and LDL levels are also linked with increased risk of cardiovascular disorder in later life with subclinical atherosclerosis by condensing the tunica intima and tunica media layer of the carotid artery [153]. Hence, it can be predicted that high intake of dietary saturated fatty acids and trans-fatty acids are positively associated with TC and LDL levels in adults and thereby cardiovascular disorder.

A cohort study of Bendsen et al. [​152​] demonstrated that high consumption of trans-fatty acid is also linked with an increased chance of coronary heart disease and morbidity [152]. Diets containing low carbohydrates but high amounts of saturated fatty acids, hydrogenated fats, and trans-fatty acids may increase the risk of cardiovascular disorders [3,154] as there is a positive correlation between saturated fatty acids and bad cholesterol (low-density lipoprotein) with increased risk of vascular malfunctions [153,155]. Due to differential effects of saturated fatty acids on the concentration of the subclasses of LDL, some meta-analyses and systematic reviews have reported that saturated fatty acids are not causal agents for cardiovascular disorders; moreover, it has also been reported that cardiovascular diseases are more likely to be linked with small and medium LDL particles than the larger one [156]. Dreon et al. [​157​] well documented that higher consumption of palmitic acids and myristic acids like saturated fatty acids positively associated with increased levels of larger LDL particles in plasma without alteration of the concentration of apolipoprotein B (apoB) concentration [157]. Also, a higher concentration of low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) is positively linked with increased concentrations of cholesterol-enriched larger LDL, but no changes could be found in the concentration of apoB due to the exchange of saturated fatty acids for monounsaturated fatty acids in the diet, in the context of low levels of the intake of carbohydrate-rich diet [158]. Increased HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) has also been positively associated with saturated fatty acids in the diet, which can balance the atherogenic effect of elevated LDL-C [3,156].

One of the most common dyslipidemia is atherogenic dyslipidemia with increased plasma triglycerides, reduced HDL-C, and elevated levels of small, dense LDL particles; atherogenic dyslipidemia is also associated with IR and obesity [158]. The expression of LDL is dependent upon two phenotypes; phenotype A is the individuals with predominantly larger particles of LDL, and phenotype B is characterized by the individuals with an abundance of small, dense particles of LDL [156]. Bodyweight, genetic liability, uptake of dietary micronutrient influence the LDL phenotype B expression but higher uptake of carbohydrate stimulates elevated levels of very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) that promotes the acute increase or transformation of small, dense LDL particles and phenotype B [159]. HLD has also been associated with disturbance in the microbiome of the gut with increased permeability of gut and inflammation also [99,160]. Moreover, in synchrony with earlier studies, it can be proposed that saturated fatty acids have diverse effects on atherogenic LDL particles that depend upon the amount of consumed saturated fatty acid in the context of diet, mainly with the consumption of carbohydrate, liability to atherogenic dyslipidemia.

To reduce the global burden of diet-related metabolic disorders, we should understand the lipid-enriched diet’s pathogenesis, which induces systemic damage. The present review has been trying to pinpoint various causes and effects of diseases induced by such high lipids-based diets. We have also discussed the viable strategy of managing such diet-activated conditions. Fig. 3 shows the overall deleterious impact of HLD.Fig. 3 HLD induced altered homeostasis and metabolic disorder leads to systemic anomalies.

Fig. 3

4.1 Harmful impact of HLD on the central nervous system

Previously, researchers documented the positive link between HLD and central nervous system disorders by an inflammatory response in the brain and spinal cord to develop CNS-related disorders [161]. Kothari et al. [​162​] reported that lipid-enriched diets promote alteration in the brain’s insulin signaling and impaired mental activities in a murine model [162]. Accumulating evidence demonstrates that lipid-enriched diets delay memory, increase anxiety and lead to over-generalized behaviors by altering the gut microbiota, while their long term consumption further promotes amyloid-peptide deposition, linked with Alzheimer's disease, in the brain of a murine model [163,164]. Besides, lipid-enriched diets are also positively correlated with OS by the generation of ROS, peroxynitrite, and superoxide in the brain, which exhibit transparent declination in cognition [161]. Therefore, it can be inferred from the accumulating evidence that lipid-enriched diets are positively linked with OS in the brain with impaired cognitive functions and cerebral deposition of amyloid β-peptide, which prompts Alzheimer’s disease [161,165]. Besides, lipid-enriched diet-induced OS impeded insulin signaling by up-regulating the GSK-3β and hyperphosphorylation of protein with increased amyloid β-peptide, promoting neurodegeneration and reduced synaptic plasticity; these factors ultimately lead to the occurrence of Alzheimer’s disease [162]. It was also well documented by Petrov et al. [​166​] that HLD disrupted the BBB with limited transportation of glucose and insulin to the central nervous system, which provoked hyperinsulinemia to some extent can primarily stimulate deficiency of insulin in the brain, which down-regulates the expression of insulin-degrading enzyme and less accumulation of amyloid β-peptide [166]. Moreover, abnormal behavior like conditions such as depression, anxiety may be developed by HLD via increase expression of pro-inflammatory IL-1β in the amygdala and alteration of GABAergic neurotransmission in the dorsomedial part of the hypothalamus [161].

So, it is now clear that HLD induced brain damage by some potential mediators such as IR, alteration of integrity of BBB, inflammatory responses, and generation of ROS may ultimately disrupt the brain’s normal functioning and gradually develop neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer’s disease.

4.2 Association of HLD with an inflammatory response in different parts of the body

A recent study by Guillemot-Legris et al. [​167​] has proposed that intake of lipid-enriched diets produced some inflammatory responses in the CNS, hypothalamus, adipose tissue, liver, intestine, and skeletal muscle [167]. Primarily, lipid-enriched diet stimulates the gut microbiota changes with immediate impact on intestinal free fatty acids (FFAs), which leads to chronic systemic inflammation followed by the release of immune-related cells derived pro-inflammatory cytokines with activation of the innate immune system [161]. An earlier study suggests a positive correlation between the altered gut microbiota in adiposity and inflammation [168]. Additionally, some researchers have also proposed that people with plenty of bacteria are associated with higher levels of inflammation with morbid overweight than the scarcity of bacteria in a person [169]. So, inflammatory response and reduction of the diversity of bacteria, specifically Bacteroidetes, with relatively high populations of Firmicutes are found due to intake of HLD in both animals as well as humans.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling pathway has been activated by the rearrangements of gut microbiota, which further reduces the intestinal potential and simultaneously enhances the permeability of the intestine; thus, lipopolysaccharides enter into the intestine as endotoxins and transfer of such endotoxins into the systemic circulation [161]. However, it was also evidenced that a higher quantity of FFAs in the lipid-enriched diets explicitly worked on the cells of the intestine; furthermore, higher productions of IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α in like an inflammatory mediator in the gut are directly connected with higher quantities of the release of lipopolysaccharides or FFAs [61,161]. Few earlier studies also documented that there is another step of high lipid diet-induced inflammation where lipopolysaccharide are concerned with systemic low-grade inflammatory response by enhancingthe the production of lipopolysaccharides in the intestine with inflammatory mediators and FFAs into the circulation (i.e., systemic and portal circulation) [61,170]. In addition, macrophages in the circulation showed increased TLRs expression when large amounts of lipopolysaccharides and FFAs were present in the plasma, which further facilitated to activation of the macrophages (M1 phenotype) to produce inflammatory mediators [161]. Such inflammatory mediators stimulated the pathways related to inflammation of the brain before the development of obesity. Activation of hypothalamic IkB kinase b (IKKb)/NF-kB signaling pathway occurred by higher production of cytokines and FFAs. There are two main ways of such path either via the activation of cell surface TLR or by activation of different stress-related pathways at the cellular level (e.g., endoplasmic reticulum or OS) in the hypothalamus [[171], [172], [173]]. Therefore, reduced levels of main adipokines (e.g., leptin) and insulin sensitivity initiate inflammatory gene expression in the hypothalamus by activating IKKb/NF-kB signaling [161,171]. Simultaneously, peripheral inflammation occurred via the activation of macrophages related to plasma inflammation, which can spread over the blood vessels, adipose tissues, pancreas, muscular tissues, etc. [161,174]. In the fatty tissue, accumulation of M1 macrophages occurred via the CD8+ T cells accumulation [175]. We can speculate that these macrophages play a pivotal role in developing chronic inflammation-linked metabolic anomalies [176].

A report by Lumeng and Saltiel [​174​] stated that adipose tissue declines to store additional lipids during HLD induced stress condition; on the contrary, these excess lipids are deposited in some other areas of the body such as blood vessels, liver, skeletal muscle, and pancreas [174]. Moreover, systemic inflammation provoked by such abnormal accumulation of excess lipids stimulate the up-regulation of some pro-inflammatory and M1 macrophages enrolment [161]. Additionally, the gastrointestinal tract derived lipopolysaccharides, FFAs, and some other inflammatory mediators (e.g., pro-inflammatory cytokines) are quantitatively higher in the liver [61]; which further promote systemic as well as hepatocellular inflammation via the Kupffer cell actuation and natural killer T cells accumulation in the liver [177].

Now, it can be conjectured that there is a synergistic effect of lipid-enriched diet on complex signaling interconnection of various organs of the body with low-grade systemic inflammatory responses; because of such inflammation, fat cells failed to eliminate FFAs and leads to the development of noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM), hepatic disorders, cardiovascular disorders (CVD), atherosclerosis and some types of malignancy.

4.3 Role of HLD in development of IR and NIDDM

IR is a condition where the body fails to acknowledge circulating insulin with reduced clearance of glucose from a system with a reservoir of glucose in different tissues such as adipose tissue, liver, and muscle and finally developed IR incidence [178]. Lipid-enriched diets induce IR and thereby alter the normal functions of the β cell of the pancreas. Short-term administration of HLD leads to the systemic failure of response to circulating insulin and leads to the progression of hyperglycemia in murine models [179]. Accumulating evidence suggested that long-term administration of lipid-enriched diets in murine models showed higher levels of intolerance of glucose, reduced sensitivity of insulin, IR, beginning of compensation of pancreatic β cells [180,181]. However, some recent studies reported that HLD induced inflammatory responses and the developments of IR are interconnected [182,183]. Inflammatory responses in the hypothalamus by consumption of lipid-enriched diet hindered the secretion of insulin from pancreatic β cells and activity of insulin on the periphery; macrophages assembled in the islets of the pancreas and inhibited the normal function of β cells when pancreatic β cells produced pro-inflammatory cytokines [161]. Moreover, higher generation of 12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (12-HETE) occurred by the activation of the activity of 12-lipoxygenase in pancreatic β cells via the FFAs, cytokines, glucose intolerance by the consumption of HLD; this 12-HETE also an inducer of OS, which also inhibited the function of the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), ultimately leads to glucose intolerance and programmed cell death of β cells of the pancreas [184]. Hence, lipid-enriched diets stimulate the release of insulin from the pancreatic β-cells lead to hyperinsulinemia.

We have already discussed the concept of the “two-hit” hypothesis where the first hit is concerned with the gathering of fatty acids or triglycerides in the hepatic tissue and ultimately give rise to IR, and the second one is linked with inflammation and OS, which resulted in hepatic damage. But currently "multiple-hit model" has been popularized instead of the old “two-hit” model to demonstrate systemic anomalies, which is based on the connection between genetic and environmental factors to produce metabolic dysfunctions and multiple organ damage [185]. Moreover, adipose tissue lipolysis occurred due to the dual role of inflammation. Hyperinsulinemia permits glycerol and FFAs to circulate to the hepatic tissue and further promote gluconeogenesis; glycolysis in muscle is enhanced by the high concentration of insulin and production of lactate. This further moves on to the liver and is utilized as a substrate for gluconeogenesis in hepatic tissue; eventually, a higher rate of gluconeogenesis produces large amounts of glucose in the hepatocytes and developed systemic IR [161].

Subsequently, systemic IR with reduced secretion of insulin from the β cells of the pancreas ultimately leads to NIDDM [178]. Additionally, HLD induced obesity-linked pancreatic anomaly is controlled by a G-protein coupled adenosine A2B receptor found in insulin-positive β cells of islets of Langerhans, which is also an accepted promoter of inflammation [186]. Furthermore, it has also been reported in an earlier review study that, specifically, macrophage G-protein coupled adenosine A2B receptor acts as a promoter of HLD induced NIDDM [161]. It may be a viable therapeutic strategy of management against NIDDM and regulate the macrophage G-protein coupled adenosine A2B receptor by manipulating the monocytes either genetically or pharmacologically. In this context, it was clearly stated that the development of IR and NIDDM are linked with each other in association with large amounts of high lipid diets.

4.4 Impact of HLD on the hepatic and cardiovascular system

Saturated fatty acids and hydrogenated fats in HLD alter the redox homeostasis, which is further provoked by pro-inflammatory cytokines [3]. Moreover, inflammatory mediators like IL-6 and TNF-α plays an essential role in the development of NAFLD in human and key stimulus for production of various proteins in the liver (e.g., fibrinogen, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein) in acute-phase of response; where a higher level of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) indicates an increased risk of cardiovascular disorder (CVD) in a patient with NAFLD mediated NASH [187]. However, HLD also exerts deleterious effects on cardiac tissue architecture by reducing the number of cardiac muscle fiber, inflammatory responses, deposition of lipids within the myocardium, dissolution of the nucleus, which indicate muscle filaments degeneration and necrosis of cardiac muscle, respectively; in hepatic tissue with cytoplasmic vacuolization, accumulation of lipids, infiltration of inflammatory cells, necrotic cells and cellular lysis respectively [3].

In addition, saturated fatty acids, trans-fatty acids, hydrogenated fat in ready-made foods altering the LDL/HDL ratio, which leads to dyslipidemic conditions. HLD also alters some liver and heart functional enzymes and stimulates hepatic and cardiac injury, respectively. Palmitic acid, lauric acid, myristic acid, and hydrogenated fats in HLD increase the SubG1 phase by arresting the G0/G1 phase, loss of mitochondrial potential, and decreasing viability of hepatocytes and cardiomyocytes, respectively, which further indicates programmed cell death of hepatocytes and cardiomyocytes. According to the study of Banerjee et al. (2020), HLD induces NAFLD mediated hepatic and cardiac as well as systemic damage [3]. But, the NAFLD is a complex disease that is associated with various factors, and to explain this disease “multiple-hit model” is appropriate instead of the “two-hit” hypothesis [185]. In patients with NAFLD, a multi-functional gene liver X receptors-α (LXRα) is linked with the accumulation of fats in hepatocytes with inflammatory responses and hepatic fibrosis [188]. According to Yasutake et al. [​189​], cholesterol intake is dramatically increased in non-obese NAFLD patients than obese NAFLD patients [189]. High cholesterol significantly stimulates the progression of steatosis in the liver. Accumulation of cholesterol in the liver leads to activation of liver X receptor α-sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c (LXRα-SREBP-1c) pathway, which is the critical signaling cascade for the development of NAFLD [188].

Song et al. [​188​] proposed that HLD induces hyperlipidemic effects and metabolic disturbances by increasing the visceral fats, inflammatory factors, OS, and IR. Anti-inflammatory adiponectin acts as a mediator of IR and inflammatory response, promoting the development of NASH [188]. Furthermore, different isoforms of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) (e.g., TGF-β1, TGF-β2, and TGF-β3) promotes necroinflammation, development of hepatic fibrosis and steatohepatitis through Kupffer cells, stellate cells, and endothelial cells of the liver [190,191]. Moreover, HLD alters the lipid metabolism, energy balance, and inflammatory response at the genetic level by transcription factors such as PPAR-α and PPAR-γ. Some earlier studies well documented that PPAR-α and PPAR-γ regulates mitochondrial as well as peroxisomal β-oxidation and Ω-oxidation (microsomal). Still, HLD down-regulated the expression of PPAR-α and PPAR-γ, which altered the β-oxidation and Ω-oxidation regulatory mechanism [188]. Souza-Mello [192] suggested that inactivation of the transcription factors (i.e., PPAR-α and PPAR-γ) also promoted reduced expression of anti-inflammatory adiponectin and increased IR. Still, activation has a beneficial impact [192]. Hence, it can be suggested that HLD with a high amount of saturated fatty acids (e.g., palmitic acid, lauric acid, myristic acid), trans-fatty acids, hydrogenated fats activated LXRα-SREBP-1c pathway associated NAFLD, dyslipidemia, altered hepatic and cardiac metabolism, increased expression of certain pro-inflammatory factors, generation of ROS, a decrease of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and necro-apoptosis in hepatocytes and cardiomyocytes respectively.

However, an earlier study demonstrated that 20 % of the fat-containing diet increased nitric oxide production (NO) and thereby OS, resulting in larger lesion size after myocardial infarction in a rodent model [193]. Effector T cells mediated infiltration of fatty tissuesand vascular tissues are linked with some cardiovascular problems in lipid-enriched diet-induced inadequate systemic inflammatory response; an earlier cohort study demonstrated the significant difference between the obese patient and lean persons on the pro-inflammatory effector memory-like phenotype (e.g., C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 3+) where the obese patients have a higher number of C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 3+ (CXCR3+) effector memory T cells. This phenotype was also found in murine models. Moreover, it was also well documented that the PI3K p110d-Akt signaling pathway is responsible for the differentiation of CXCR3+ effector memory T cells [194]. Additionally, malfunctioning of vascular endothelium due to regular consumption of lipid-enriched diet plays an essential role in the incidence of cardiovascular disorders [82,195]. Martins et al. [196​] reported that in erythrocytes, the l-arginine-NO pathway is halted by the feeding of animal fat-enriched HLD (e.g., fat from pig) in the murine model [196]. NO maintains the vascular functions by concealing the aggregation of platelets and promoting NO pool within the vascular system; moreover, there is an inhibition of vascular function because of reduced bioavailability of NO, which increases cardiovascular disorders. So it may be hypothesized that IR, free fatty acids (FFAs), and higher blood sugar levels autonomously alter the endothelial homeostasis by intake of HLD and progression of ill cardiovascular effects [161,197]. Small cytokines, signaling protein molecules on binding with erythrocytes through Fy glycoprotein or cluster of differentiation-234 protein causes up-regulation of such chemokines in 60 % lipid-enriched diet-fed murine model. Furthermore, there was a high level of cholesterol and externalization of phosphatidylserine from the membrane in erythrocytes of lipid-enriched diet administered mice associated with a higher rate of phagocytosis of erythrocytes by macrophages outside and by spleen inside which, further promotes atherosclerosis [197]. Here it can be suggested that HLD is a contributor to cardiovascular disorders via adipose tissue and vascular tissue infiltration via effector T cells, malfunctions of the endothelium, and erythrocytes.

4.5 Harmful effects of HLD on the digestive system

Lipid-enriched diets are major contributors to inflammatory responses in the intestine and adjacent tissue dysfunction. The consumption of HLD can intensify chemical-induced colitis via the up-regulation of inflammatory cytokines; moreover, in Mdr1a−/− murine model, ileitis can also aggravate tissue damage in the mucosal area and instinctive colitis in Muc2−/−, TNFΔARE murine model [161].

Previously, some researchers suggested that intake of lipid-enriched diets have also been positively correlated with higher-risk inflammatory bowel disorders (IBDs) with chronic inflammation in the digestive tract and other functional bowel disorders in human [198,199]. Moreover, high consumption of dietary lipid is positively connected with a higher risk of Crohn’s disease-like inflammatory bowel disorders due to stimulation of an inflammatory response in the gut and disturbance of microbiome linked with alterations of mucosal immunity in the colon [161]. Additionally, a fat-enriched diet causes an imbalance of protective bacteria (e.g., Bacteroidetes) and harmful bacteria (e.g., Proteobacteria, Firmicutes) permeability of the intestine, maladaptation mucosal bacteria with modifying the composition of the normal microbiota. G protein-coupled receptor 43 (GPR43) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPAR-γ) were reduced by HLD, which further stimulate these effects. Hence, activation of GPR43 and PPAR-γ signaling pathways could be taken as a viable approach of management for curing the patient with inflammatory bowel disorders (e.g., Crohn’s disease) [200,201]. Additionally, anomalies in gastrointestinal movements have also been concerned with HLD induced obese mice activated inflammatory response and dysfunction of the intestine with altered morphology of the intestinal tract’s intrinsic nervous system. The mechanism behind the intestinal macrophages mediated abnormal movements of the colon that occurred in the HLD induced an obese model is via G-protein coupled adenosine A2B receptor-directed excitatory tachykinergic pathways [161].

4.6 Role of HLD in urinary system related problems

We have already mentioned that the role of gut microbiota protects the health of humans. In keeping with the effects of MSG, regular as well as prolonged intake of HLD reducing the population of Bacteroidetes and enhancing the abundance of both Firmicutes and Proteobacteria in the intestine leads to OS mediated kidney damage [82]. A cross-sectional analysis demonstrated a robust connection between the consumption of HLD enriched with saturated fatty acids and proteinuria, which is linked with damage of normal functions of kidneys which is more significant than 19,000 adults above the age of 45 years [202]. To divulge the possible mechanism for the progression of malfunction of the excretory system or the primary excretory organ through the consumption of lipid-enriched diets, researchers are now increasingly using rodent models for further investigations with proper maintenance of biodiversity. Ebenezer et al. [203] reported that administration of lipid-enriched diet produced hyperalbuminemia via the up-regulation of TNF-α, NF-kB like inflammatory factors, and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase in the outer part of the kidney, which is a marker of OS [203]. A similar type of metabolic and molecular impact of lipid-enriched diet was reported in an earlier study by using the Sprague-Dawley rat model [204] with a short duration of (i.e., 42 days) experiment as compared to the previous (i.e., 70 days) one [203]. In addition, an ApoE−/− the murine model has been used to develop hyperlipidemia induced inflammatory responses on the progression of renal malfunction by the administration of HLD [161]; which further showed a significant up-regulation of pro-inflammatory factors like IL-6, TNF-α followed by the development of inflammation in kidney, the proliferation of mesangial cells and hyperalbuminemia. Moreover, the anti-IL-6 receptor antibody acts as a protective agent against such HLD induced inflammation-mediated anomalies in the kidney in the murine model. Furthermore, it was also documented that renal sterol-regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP1) is upregulated by the action of pro-fibrotic growth factors and pro-inflammatory cytokines. It has been proposed that up-regulation of SREBP 1/2 is connected with overweight, increased blood sugar, and increased insulin by the administration of 60 % of fat in the diet in a murine model [205]. Another study by Wang et al. [​206​] demonstrated that inflammation in the kidney and hyperalbuminemia could be inhibited by the knockout of SREBP1 in the murine model [206]. Hence, it can be postulated that SREBP1 intensifies the kidney’s inflammatory response, which further leads to HLD induced CKD.

4.7 Deleterious impact of HLD on the skeletal system

A mesenchymal stem cell is an origin of lipocytes, fat cells, and osteoblast, which further leads to the interactivity between formations of lipocytes, fat cells with the growth of osteoclasts that can be influenced by the consumption of a high amount of lipids in the diet [161].

Body of evidence on the incidence, distribution, and control of diseases well documented that high dietary lipids are directly correlated with osteopenia and increased chance of osteoporosis [[207], [208], [209]]. Moreover, 21.1 % of lipid-enriched diet-induced osteopenia with OS in a murine model [210]. Similarly, high lipid diets are also associated with a reduction of the number of trabeculae and volume of trabecular bone in the shinbone [211], which produced a harmful impact on the shape and number of the bone. On the contrary, some studies on animal and human model reported that higher physical stress is concerned with a higher intake of dietary lipids induced increase of bone mineral density [212,213] and higher bone mass for the short-term intake whereas the long-term intake obesity-induced showed negative impact [214]. Hence, it is now clear that dietary intake of a high amount of lipids can primarily build up bone mass for physical requirements, but dysregulation of metabolism gradually weakens the process of ossification [161].

Another experimental study on a murine model suggested that lipid-enriched diet also positively correlated with increasing adipocytes in bone marrow after injection of B16F10 melanoma cells in normal mice, which causes alteration of microenvironments of hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow and create a microenvironment for malignant cells followed by up-regulation of their growth by Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) and IL-6. Furthermore, malignant cells in the bone marrow are directly communicated with fat cells and augmented large multinucleated bone cells in the bone marrow via the expression of bone sialoprotein I (BSP1). In the context of lipid-enriched diet-induced obesity, the IL-6-JAK2-BSP1 signaling pathway plays a significant role in contributing to the microenvironment for metabolic tumors [215]. However, due to the high intake of fatty foods, the hormone leptin plays a vital role in regulating bone deposition by high lipid diet [216].

A large amount of lipid-based diet controls bone growth and resorption, leading to bone fractureobesity-induced (i.e., osteoporosis) via the IL-6 and leptin.

4.8 Different types of malignancy caused by HLD

Lipid-enriched diets are also associated with certain types of malignancy in humans as well as animal models via inflammatory response, metabolic alteration, and affecting some signaling cascades. High lipid diet-induced cancer in liver, breast, stomach, intestine, pancreas, and prostate in different human and animal models via targeting different cellular signaling pathways have been summarized in Table 2.Table 2 HLD induced cancer along with target pathways in different human and animal models.

Table 2Target organ	Target pathway	Cancer	References	
1. Liver	Activation of Lymphotoxin-β receptor, lymphocytes, canonical NF-kB signaling pathway.	Hepatocellular carcinoma	[217]	
2. Mammary gland	TGF-β1/SMAD3/miR-130 negative-feedback loop via down regulation of miR-140.	Breast cancer	[218]	
3. Stomach	Activation of β-catenin, leptin and PI3K signaling pathway.	Gastric cancer	[161,219]	
4. Intestine	Activation of PPARδ/β-catenin, inhibition of nuclear bile acid activated receptor (BAR) and farnesoid X receptor (FXR) signaling pathway.	Intestinal cancer	[220,221,222,223,224]	
5. Pancreas	i. Activation of CCK-receptor pathway, signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3), Kras and its downstream pathways including phospho-ERK, TNF-1 signaling.
ii. Mutation in PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 pathway.	Pancreatic cancer	i. [225,226,227,228]
ii. [226,229]	
6. Prostate	i. Activation of IL6/pSTAT3 signaling, growth factor signaling (e.g., IGF-I/PI3K/AKT signaling cascade).
ii. Pml and SREBP-supported altered and de novo lipogenesis.
iii. Activation of inflammatory pathways via cytokine, chemokines storm and MCP-1/CCR2 pathway.
iv. Modulation of endocrine pathways.	Prostate cancer	i.[230,231,232,233,234,235,236,237]
ii.[234,238]
iii.[239,240,241,234]
iv.[242,243,234]	

4.8.1 Hepatocellular carcinoma

Nowadays, cancer has been marked as a significant life-threatening disease after cardiovascular complications. Earlier, we have already discussed the occurrence of NAFLD mediated systemic damage due to changes in food habits and consumption of HLD, which are enriched with saturated fatty acids like palmitic acid, lauric acid, and myristic acids hydrogenated fats mediated [3]. Here we have discussed the crosstalk between NASH and hepatocellular carcinoma; NAFLD advances to NASH, which further causes progression of fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [161].

Earlier study well demonstrated the synergistic impact of CD8+ T and natural killer T (NKT) cells in the progression of inflammation, fibrosis in the liver, which ultimately leads to the development of NASH [177]. A recent experiment was conducted to evaluate the underlying cause of the conversion of NASH to HCC, and the result suggests that long-term fat-enriched but choline-deficient diets developed NASH, and thereafter NASH mediated HCC; primarily a T cell-derived co-stimulatory ligand LIGHT secreted from the NKT cells, which, ultimately developed steatosis. Moreover, LIGHT binds to the hepatocellular activation of the lymphotoxin-β receptor (LTβR) induced lipid uptake by NKT cells. Furthermore, the molecular mechanism behind the transition of NASH to HCC is assisted by LTβR and classical NF-kB signaling pathways of the liver [217]. So, it can be hypothesized that HLD induced HCC was developed by the activation of the lymphotoxin-β receptor, lymphocytes, and canonical NF-kB signaling cascades.

4.8.2 Malignancy of the mammary gland

Adipose tissue of the breast of humans is composed of a diverse number of cell populations such as mature white adipocytes, immune cells, multipotent mesenchymal stem cells, committed progenitor cells, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. Mesenchymal stem cells can be transformed into heterogeneous cells like myofibroblasts, fibroblasts, and adipocytes by influencing foreign stimulus [244]. The microenvironment of adipose tissue is a positive contributor to breast cancer [245]. Seo et al. [246] demonstrated that the development of malignancy of the mammary gland and remodeling of the fibrotic microenvironment is influenced by obesity induced differentiated myofibroblast in the adipose tissue of the mammary gland [246]. In addition, HLD provokes the activation of TGF-β1 signals followed by stimulation of SMAD3, which ultimately reduces the expression of microRNA (miR)-140 after binding on it. Moreover, inhibition of miR-140 causes up-regulation of the TGF-β1/SMAD3 signaling pathway with decreased expression of miR-140, which further leads to differentiation of myofibroblast. Here, the TGF-β1/SMAD3/miR-130 negative-feedback loop plays a crucial role in a higher rate of differentiation of myofibroblast with reduced expression of miR-140 in fat tissue mammary gland due to consumption of lipid-enriched diets [218]. It has also been found from the earlier studies that the occurrence and metastasis of malignancy in the mammary gland are positively linked with myofibroblasts, and myofibroblasts induced a small-scale fibrotic environment [218,246]. So, it can be speculated that high lipid diets induced TGF-β1/SMAD3/miR-130 negative-feedback loop dependent higher risk of malignancy in mammary gland occurred via the reduced expression of miR-140 mediated differentiation of myofibroblast in adipose tissue of the mammary gland of human.

4.8.3 Malignancy in the stomach

Stomach or gastric cancer progresses slowly compared to other cancers. Recently, researchers have identified some types of malignancies arising from the mucous membrane of the stomach, which are directly associated with the intake of HLD [161]. Moreover, very little information is available about the mechanism of dietary lipids-induced abnormal growth of cells. Therefore, cancer in the stomach stimulates the cellular functions of the stomach’s mucous membrane. Earlier studies well documented that the administration of lipid-enriched diet mediated deposition of lipid droplets in the gastric pits leads to abnormal cellular growth in the stomach’s mucous membrane in the murine model. Upregulation of calnexin, lysosome-associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP2), Golgi membrane (GM) 130, and cytochrome c oxidase (COX) subunit 4 in the mucous membrane layer of the stomach altered the homeostasis of the organelle due to abnormal accumulation of lipids on it [219].

In the more susceptible area of malignant growth in the stomach’s mucous membrane, the accumulation of lipids ultimately altered the homeostasis of the organelle. Activation of the β-catenin pathway provoked gastric mucosal-cancer development via the influence of the division of stem cells by lipid-enriched diet. Therefore, it can be observed that the β-catenin way is being regulated by the leptin signaling pathway [161,219]. Therefore, it can be speculated that β-catenin, leptin, and PI3K signaling pathways are associated with stomach cancer by consuming HLD.

4.8.4 Intestinal Cancer

Cancer of the small intestine is a sporadic form of cancer compared to malignancy in the large intestine. There was accumulating evidence well documented about the relationship between HLD and cancer in the intestine [151,161]. A diet consisting of 60 % fat led to the rapid acquisition of cancerous properties by normal intestinal cells [220] well corroborated with earlier study [247]. Schulz et al. [247] stated that disturbances in a group of the bacteria in the gut in K-rasG12Dint murine model without obesity promote intestinal tumors’ development [247]. The result of malignant growth by the daily intake of HLD occurred in the intestine directly or indirectly via shortening of the villi with a higher depth of the crypt of the intestine, the disturbed ratio of the intestinal stem cells and Paneth cell populations, augmentation of stem cells of the intestine without the Paneth cell-mediated signals and the formation of organoids in the intestine by progenitor stem cells [220,221]. However, there are two crucial pathways by which HLD induced a higher chance of occurrence of intestinal cancer; either by activating the PPARδ/β-catenin pathway via enhancing the unique differentiating character of the stem cells from normal cells and progression of malignant growth in progenitor intestinal cells [220] or by inhibition of the nuclear bile acid-activated receptor (BAR), farnesoid X receptor (FXR) signaling by reducing bile acid and actively participated in the proliferation of the colonic epithelial cells [221]. Simultaneously, some other reports suggested that there is an interconnection between the HLD provoked the activation of PPARδ signaling and beginning as well as the development of colon or rectal cancer [[222], [223], [224]]. Further investigations are required to address how high lipid diet-induced inhibition of FXR and activation of PPARδ signaling cascade.

4.8.5 Pancreatic cancer

Cancer in the pancreas can occur on an exocrine or endocrine part, spread over the total pancreatic tissue. The duodenum secreted trophic peptide cholecystokinin (CCK) in response to high dietary intake of lipids enriched foods. In an earlier study, it has also been shown that high dietary intake of lipids; mainly saturated fatty acids and CCK are positively associated with malignancy in the pancreas [225], Some recent reports suggested that overweight further provoke malignancy [248,249]) by triggering the levels of insulin, insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), estrogen, which altered the level of leptin, visfatin, adiponectin, and disturbed intestinal mthe icrobiome by low-grade inflammation and immune modulation [225]. Moreover, inflammation plays a significant role in developing pancreatic cancer in obese animal models [227,250,251]. Nadella et al. [225] well documented that high dietary intake of lipids with high content of saturated fatty acids stimulate pancreatic cancer via the activation of the CCK-receptor pathway by increasing the level of CCK in blood, advanced fibrosis, maintenance of tumor microenvironment, reducing the cluster of differentiation 8+ lymphocytes with downregulation of tumor suppressor genes leading to metastasis [225].

Exocrine pancreatic cancer (e.g., pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma) has been associated with a daily intake of a high amount of HLD; there is a relationship between Kras mutation, oncogenesis, and inflammation [227]. High dietary lipid intake stimulates the inflammatory response and thereby a positive contributor to the activation of Kras [228]. In addition, crosstalk between pancreatic acinar cells and neoplastic lesion in the pancreas occurs via substitution of a single base in Kras; moreover, Philip et al. [227] further well documented that high lipid diet activated the Kras via COX2 followed by an inflammatory response in the pancreas with stromal fibrosis, neoplastic lesion in the pancreas and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma from normal acinar cells of the pancreas [227]. Therefore, inactivated stellate cell in the pancreas further activates HLD induced increased expression of prolyl 4-hydroxylase, fibronectin, alpha polypeptide II, cadherin 11, alpha-smooth muscle actin via the Kras activation [226,227,252,253]. Signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) constitute a significant controller of the development of carcinogenesis in the pancreas. High dietary lipid consumption increased the phosphorylation of STAT3 [226]. Here, HLD contributed to fibro-inflammatory responses in the pancreas.

Oncogenic activated Kras promotes downstream stimulation of COX2, phosphor-ERK, and macrophage infiltration in the area surrounded by the pancreas’ neoplastic lesion leading to the motivation of the formation of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia [227]. Therefore, inflammatory response, involvement of pro-inflammatory mediators, and fibrosis in the pancreas developed via COX2 mediated positive feed-forward loop, which is regulated by the activity of Kras. Earlier investigation proposed that advancement of HLD induced intraepithelial neoplasia in the pancreas progressed by TNF-α via TNF-1 signaling [228]. Moreover, accumulating shreds of evidence suggested that pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma developed via the stimulation of the anti-apoptotic, pro-inflammatory transcription factor NF-kB by the up-regulation of pro-tumorigenic multifunctional protein p62, a classical receptor of autophagy [226,[254], [255], [256]]. Therefore, it can be postulated that high lipid diets are responsible for pancreatic malignancy by inflammation and uncontrolled autophagy. Another significant observation of Chang et al. [226​] revealed the occurrences of pancreatic carcinoma depend on gender (i.e., male > female) [226].

It can be speculated that there are several inflammatory mediators which regulate the activity of Ras via positive feedback loop; higher incidence of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma developed through the mutation of oncogenic Ras in the cells of the pancreas by consumption of dietary lipids in high amount, but in average healthy person oncogenic Kras is present [227]. Therefore, it can be conjectured that a higher intake of dietary lipid-induced inefficient autophagy and inflammation with a higher risk of development of neoplasia in the pancreas, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma via downward stimulation of COX2, phosphor-ERK, macrophage infiltration. There is a relationship between pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and insulin signaling pathway via the modification of genes by high calorie contained high lipid diet [229]. Further, to justify the correlation between HLD and pancreatic carcinoma, some researchers identified another signaling cascade involved via several mutations in PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 pathway causes alteration of amino acids, which ultimately leads to modification of polarity, pH, and hydropathy to such signaling proteins [226,229].

4.8.6 Prostate cancer

Dietary patterns and prostate cancer are linked with each other. Previously, researchers and scientists demonstrated that the consumption of lipids enriched food enhances tumorigenesis of prostate cancer by the influence of various cytokines [231]. Moreover, accumulating pieces of evidence well demonstrated that high dietary lipid up-regulated the expression of IL-6 and IL-13 in prostatic tissue and escalated population myeloid-derived suppressor cells in a murine model [231,257]. Further, the development of the tumor was triggered by IL-6 signaling through the phosphorylation of a signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (pSTAT3) [230]; additionally, IL-13 stimulates macrophage polarization to alternatively activated macrophage (M2) [258]. Hayashi et al. [231] also demonstrated that the local macrophages secreted IL-6 and accelerated the growth of the prostate tumor via pSTAT3 with enhanced the population of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in the microenvironment of pro-tumors [231]. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells act as a suppressor of multiple immune effectors and T cells [259]. It can be postulated that consumption of HLD leads to higher production of myeloid-derived suppressor cells, increased ratio of alternatively activated macrophage (M2) to classically activated macrophage (M1), and thereby progression of prostate cancer via the IL6/pSTAT3 signaling cascade in such patients with or without obesity [231].

Increased intakes of HLD induced obesity and increase the level of insulin are directly linked with higher insulin-like growth factor-I in circulation which is a critical factor for the development of different cancers, including prostate cancer [234,249] via modulation of IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling [232]. Further, activation of IGF-I/IGF-IR axis has also been associated with HLD-induced obesity-mediated cancer [233]. Moreover, inactivation of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) either by deletion or mutation promoted oncogenic activation of PI3K-AKT signaling to boost the metastasis [234]. Previously, researchers also reported the HLD-induced prostate cancer could be developed and progressed via IGF-I/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway [[235], [236], [237]]. Therefore, it can be speculated that IGF-I/PI3K/AKT signaling is the primary target pathway of HLD-induced prostate cancer initiation and development. However, there is no such impact of various sources of fats on the IGF/insulin axis. Therefore, it can be suggested that more studies are required for the effects of different sources of fats in HLD induced development of prostate cancer.

The dietary intake of high amounts of lipid-induced prostate cancer via up-regulation of the human genome encodes seven elongase enzymes (ELOLV7) [260]. However, up-regulation of scavenger receptor class B, type I (SR-BI), and angiogenesis leads to metastasis of tumor by intake of high lipids containing Western-style diet [234]. In addition, Huang et al. [​261​] proposed that the reduced level of FASN was inversely associated with high dietary lipids induced prostate cancer [261]. Moreover, alteration of lipogenesis influenced prostate cancer’s metastasis by regular intake of Western-diet as a high dietary lipid source [234]. Promyelocytic leukemia protein (Pml) inactivation and reactivated mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) leads to lethal metastatic tumors from indolent PTEN-null prostate tumors followed by overactivation of sterol responsive element-binding proteins (SREBP) with altered total lipid profiles. Further regulator of the lipogenic gene SREBP stimulated by high intake of dietary lipids leads to fat deposition in non-adipose tissue [234,238]. Therefore, it can be postulated that a higher rate of progression of prostate cancer may be correlated with Pml, SREBP-linked alteration of lipogenesis, and de novo lipogenesis. Furthermore, there is no such evidence about high dietary intake of lipids-induced prostate cancer due to accumulation of exogenous fat and endogenous alterations of lipid profiles.

The high amount of dietary lipids is associated with an obesity-induced inflammatory response in adipose tissue via cytokines’ secretion [239]. Higher levels of monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1, MCP-5, tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMP)-1, IL-16, chemokine (C-C motif) ligand (CCL)12, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand (CXCL)1, CXCL10, and CXCL13 in serum are associated with intake of HLD due to the up-regulation of the cluster of differentiation (CD)3, CD45, forkhead box protein P3 (FoxP3), MCP-1, IL-6, and TNF-α [240]. Additionally, Huang et al. [241] well documented that infiltration of macrophages was strongly correlated with HLD induced progression of the prostate tumor of humans via MCP-1/CCR2 pathway [241]. Moreover, the palmitic acid in the HLD [3] activated macrophage inhibitory cytokine 1 (MIC-1), transforming growth factor-b, which is also a contributor to prostate cancer [262]. In some rodent models, higher expression of FABP4 and interleukin-8 also triggered the occurrence of lipids enriched diet-induced prostate cancer [128]. Furthermore, TNF-like weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK), CCL3, CCL4, and CCL5 like cytokines and chemokines are also associated with prostate cancer development the daily consumption of fatty food [234]. High dietary lipid-induced hypertrophy of adipocytes promoted Cav-1 secretion for the development of carcinogenesis in the prostate [263,264]. It can be assumed that carcinogenesis in the prostate developed via the activation of cytokines from adipocytes, inflammation, and infiltration of immune cells into tumors due to high dietary intakes of fatty foods.

Lipid enriched diet enhanced the progression of prostate cancer via dysregulation of the hormonal mechanism [242,243]. In the process of carcinogenesis in the prostate, sex hormones play a significant role [234]. Earlier reports well documented that a high lipid-containing diet without omega-3 fatty acids or a quantitatively low amount of omega-3 fatty acids altered the hormonal profiles within the tumor, which are positively correlated with the maturation and advancement of malignant tumor [234,265]. Massillo et al. [266​] proposed that high estradiol in serum contributed to fast growth of tumor in transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate (TRAMP)-C1 allograft model via the up-regulation of transcription of cytochrome P450 aromatase (CYP19A) which further stimulated the conversion of androgen to estrogens; the transcription was regulated by intratumoral C-terminal-binding protein 1 (CtBP1) in lipids enriched diet received a murine model with rapid growth of neuroendocrine tumor model (e.g., TRAMP-C1 allograft tumor model) [266]. Another report well documented that depletion of CtBP1 resulted in small and slow growth of tumor in an androgen-independent model (e.g., PC-3 xenografts model) [267]; therefore, it can be suggested that CtBP-1 plays a significant role in the modulation of hormones within the tumor by helping of transcriptional factors and leads to the development of high dietary intakes of lipids induced carcinogenesis in the prostate.

5 Alarming impact of savory tastant in HLD on human health

Nowadays, excessive use of MSG in HLD as ready-made foods increases rapidly due to the general public’s demand. There are various harmful effects of MSG and HLD independently in animal models and human beings. The present review hypothesizes that if MSG and HLD alone can induce toxic effects on different animal models as a human trial, then the ready-made foods containing these ingredients may also produce a deadly impact on human health. However, there is very little information on the combined effect of MSG and HLD on OS-related metabolic disorders. In normal homeostasis, for different biochemical pathways, intracellular signaling, defense against microorganisms, and cellular functions, low ROS levels are essential. The higher production of ROS altered the equilibrium between the ratio of the oxidants or pro-oxidants and antioxidants agents, which ultimately prompt lipid peroxidation and depleting both enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidant cellular reserves, causing tissue damage and programmed cell death [268]. Some small scale preliminary studies suggested that flavor-enhancing chemicals like MSG and hydrogenated fats in diet or, more precisely, ready-made foods are the dietary operators of altered expression of a gene that developed disease with a term of phenotype in psoriasis and hypertensive human [[269], [270], [271], [272]].

Pedram et al. [273] reported the relationship between food addiction and severity of obesity; body composition is higher in women than men [273]. Some earlier reports demonstrated that regular consumption of protein and fat-based foods of diet is considered as food addiction as per Yale Food Addiction Scale (YFAS) in individuals [273,274]; individuals with obesity also consume a more significant amount of fat is also considered as food addicted as per the criteria of YFAS [275]. Another study demonstrated that the ubiquity of food addiction was about 38.3 % higher in the population with obese people as compared to healthy people [276]. Obregón et al. [277] also stated that about 30 % of the prevalence of food-addicted people in an area is marked as obese [277]. From these shreds of evidence, we can say that food addiction and obesity are strongly correlated with each other, i.e., more food-addicted people in an area; more will be the prevalence of obesity prevalence. A report by Pongking et al. [​82​] showed that MSG along with HLD induced kidney damage by altered gut microbiota, increased p-cresol sulfate levels in urine, kidney injury molecule (KIM)-1, and high mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB-1) expression in the kidney; it is also a risk factor for CKD [82]. In children and adolescents, fast-food consumption like Sausage, French fries, and pizza are positively linked with metabolic syndromes with the obese abdomen, increased triglycerides that may develop diabetes, and cardiovascular disorders like deadly disease [278]. Nowadays, metabolic syndromes are spreading quickly worldwide in both children and adolescents, and it becomes a significant health concern [279]. The flavor-enhancing high lipid diet as fast-food has several unique features like high glycemic load, palatability, primeval preferences of taste, immoderate size of the portion, more important daily energy requirements of healthy individuals [278]. Tavares et al. [​280​] demonstrated in Brazilian adolescents that increase consumption of ultra-processed foods are directly linked with metabolic syndromes [280]; moreover, higher consumption of ready-made foods are also linked with increased risk of IR [278]. Additionally, it has been proved from the earlier studies that regular consumption of such kinds of food increased the risk of obesity and cardio-metabolic disorders [[281], [282], [283]]. Kelishadi et al. [281] reported that overweight and obese children consumed 2.7 times of fast-foods per week as compared to normal children who consumed 1.2 times per week in the Isfahaninan population [281]. The nationwide representative study demonstrated fast-food intake is also positively correlated with obesity in children and adolescents of America [283]. An earlier report stated a significant correlation between the consumption frequencies of fast-foods with hydrogenated fats, cheese puffs, chips, and altered lipid profile levels in urban and rural children of Iran [282].

We already reported that different food industries, cafeteria, restaurants add a high amount of MSG for the strategy of flavor enhancement in the fast-food formulation, and such kinds of food have a high glycemic index with energy density because of its high amounts of salts in the form of MSG instead of common salts like sodium chloride, trans-fatty acids, saturated fatty acids, hydrogenated fats with low levels of dietary fiber [3,51,278]. The permitted use of trans-fatty acid is significantly less in quantity with lower than 10 % calories from saturated fats in Iran; on the contrary, they have used about 23.6%–30.6% of trans-fatty acids in the total content of fatty acids. Over the last half-century, in fast-food restaurants, the portion sizes of burgers, fried potatoes, pizzas as fast-food increased by two to five folds which is another major factor. An earlier investigation on the content of fatty acids in fast-food reported that in French fries, fried chicken contains about 41 g–74 g of total fat, 0.3 g–24 g of trans-fat used by renowned food-chain restaurants in the World [278].

Saturated and trans-fatty acids in the form of HLD intake increased the expression and secretion of both IL-6 and CRP, respectively [284,285], which altered the normal metabolic homeostasis of the body and appeared to be a key factor for different diseases such as glucose intolerance, hypertension, insulin resistance, hyperlipidemia as a part of metabolic syndrome [3,286].

On the other hand, another study demonstrated that prolonged intake of flavor-enhancing chemicals like MSG-rich diet in a healthy population attenuates the umami taste sensation and simultaneously diminishes the appetite center for savory foods selectively in females [287].

Earlier studies reported that strong gustatory stimuli impaired the satisfaction of gustatory response of salt, sweet and fat or transferred fondness to the diet-enriched with such taste stimuli [[288], [289], [290]]. Taste receptor type 1 member 1 (T1R1) or T1R3 subunits are responsible for sweet, savory taste sensations and influenced by this receptor [291]. Further, some other studies demonstrated that regular intake of MSG in diet-induced down-regulation of the T1Rs reduced the sense of savory impulses [287,292]. Wang et al. [293] proposed male also eat more protein as well as MSG-enriched foods than females [293] but not the different properties with the sense of gustatory impulse of umami; hence, it can be speculated that males are more prone to MSG induced anomaly than female and there is a complex association between the satiation, hunger and savory taste in human.

Due to the universal demand of fast-food and restaurants in developing areas were converted to a more famous site because of their advertisement. Regular consumption of flavor-enhancing high lipid diet in the form of ready-made foods all over the world is positively associated with nutrition-related non-communicable diseases (NR-NCD). Nowadays, NR-NCD becomes a global burden, affecting both the wealthy and developing countries. Further investigation on cultural factors induced rapidly increasing NR-NCD can only give insight into some of the world's most unfavorable problems [278]. A recent study by Banerjee et al. (2020) suggested that MSG mixed HLD caused NAFLD mediated systemic damage via generation of ROS with altered redox-homeostasis and pro-inflammatory/anti-inflammatory factors, which ultimately leads to apoptosis possibly through p53/p21 and mitochondrial caspase-mediated signaling [14]. A recent report proposed that flavor enhancing diet generates ROS and alters the redox homeostasis that indirectly stimulate the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) mediated infection causes novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreaks [294].

Higher intake of flavor-enhancing high lipid diet in the form of ready-made foods has an undesirable impact on the occurrence of metabolic syndromes, hypertriglyceridemia, obesity, the cardio-metabolic risk for both children and adolescents. Further, health care strategies are required for the prevention of such anomalous conditions.

6 Alarming message of the uses of MH in regular diet and possible strategy of management to fight against MH induced anomalous situations

Fig. 4 shows the hypothetical target pathway of the harmful impact of MSG mixed HLD as a part of ready-made foods with their alarming implications. The random use of MSG in HLD and frequent intake of MH knowingly by hungry-busy-working people at regular intervals in quantitatively higher levels ultimately leads to a warning impact on human health. Earlier studies demonstrated that about 1.5 grams–10 grams of MSG had been used in daily diets in Japan, Korea. Therefore, immense and frequent use of MSG combined with HLD is an excellent warning for public health. Moreover, no company shows how much they use MSG as a seasoning substance in their foods and meals or whether they use it at all, but they do use it. Because there is no such law to enhance the taste of food by adding unhealthy chemicals, some restaurants are using MSG instead of salt for improving the taste of specific foods, and surprisingly, they have proudly declared that they have not used food additives in their restaurant or the foods [9]. Consumption of "junk food" as a heavy diet may cause obesity resulting in the emergence of movements towards public health consciousness and a ban on advertising of such commodities [296]. The addiction to a particular food or junk foods with high amounts of lipid is strongly correlated with food-related health problems in developing countries. So food addiction is considered a phenomenon for decreasing health problems that mainly arise from foods [274]. Consequently, food addiction is related to energy-rich food consumption and obesity, primarily abdominal fat accumulation. Since food addiction is predominantly influenced and provoked by compulsive behavior and emotional and environmental factors such as stress, socio-cultural status, and chronic characteristics, these factors should be considered in future studies. Future randomized controlled research would also identify elements, combinations, and concentrations of ingredients that are potentially addictive. Furthermore, the improvement of nutrition knowledge and the promotion of consciousness in the general population regarding the harmful use of food additives in ready-made foods might be essential for a healthy lifestyle. In this context, the present review identifies alarming points about the detrimental impact of MSG and high lipid diet independently and combined as a part of ready-made foods, which may lead to systemic injury and various systemic anomalies. It can be suggested that we have to prepare the diet by reducing the use of saturated fatty acids, trans-fat, hydrogenated fats in a regular diet [3]. Meals can be prepared by mixing natural antioxidants, vitamins from different sources such as fruits, vegetables, etc., having ethnopharmacological relevance; reducing or replacing ready-made foods with a high-fiber-enriched diet, which is also another good source of antioxidants without any side effects instead of taking a synthetic drug. This is an alternative approach to reduce the harmful effects of flavor-enhancing HLD in the human body. Additionally, it was believed that this type of foods generally does not exert any adverse effects when incorporated with a well-balanced diet [8]; therefore, there must be some factor(s) that blunted the deleterious impact of MSG mixed HLD as ready-made foods when taken with proper balance diet or the balanced may contain some natural antioxidant which can reduce these toxic effects. Hence, it can be speculated that taking a balanced diet should be another viable strategy of management to combat systemic anomalies.Fig. 4 Hypothetical target pathway of the deleterious impact of savory tastant in HLD as a part of ready-made foods with their alarming impact (the black upward arrow indicates increase and red downward arrow indicates decrease).

Fig. 4

Shreds of evidence indicate the reduction of the concentration of total cholesterol, LDL as well as overall blood lipid profiles by replacing the saturated fatty acids based HLD with monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA), polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), or carbohydrate-based diet [153,156]. Both PUFA and MUFA are less concerned with the disturbances in cardiovascular events [295]. In addition, some cohort and randomized trial studies also demonstrated that lower consumption of saturated fatty acids in HLD is linked with the decrease in chances of cardiovascular disorder or replaced by PUFA. Moreover, replacement of the saturated fatty acids by plant-derived PUFA attenuates the risk of cardiovascular diseases in adults [153]. It can be suggested that as both PUFA and MUFA are beneficial for health, such researchers should study various effects of a mixture of these two, and whether it can be a viable strategy of management against the saturated fatty acids rich diet-induced anomalous situations or not which could be an alternative approach of using these mixtures by eliminating the saturated fatty acids from a regular diet. Additionally, plant-derived sterols also help reduce the dyslipidemic condition by maintaining LDL ratio to HDL. Therefore, phytosterol-containing food products can be used as therapeutic dietary options for reducing the risk of hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis. Phytosterol, like 24-epibrassinolide, acts as an antioxidant and protects neuronal cells from 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP)-induced OS and apoptosis. β-sitosterol acts as an antidiabetic, antioxidant drug; moreover, phytosterol also decreases NAFLD and NASH’s chance [188]. This review also suggests that researchers may investigate the ameliorative effect of β-sitosterol, other plant sterols, or bioactive compounds from the natural source of antioxidants on MSG mixed HLD induced changes, if any.

Another alternative strategy of management against the aforementioned anomalies can be attenuated by using specific inhibitors. Suppose we can track the target signaling pathway(s) by which flavor-enhancing high lipid diet exerted the detrimental effects. In that case, we can inhibit the signaling by using specific inhibitors without any adverse effects on the body. For example, statins are β-hydroxy β-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors. Some cholesterol absorption inhibitors reduce elevated hepatic markers enzymes and thereby lowered NAFLD occurrence by inhibiting LXRα-SREBP-1c pathway. Therefore, a reliable therapeutic strategy for patients with NAFLD is cholesterol metabolism regulation under high lipid diet conditions [188].

A recent study by Banerjee et al. [14] suggested that MSG mixed HLD induced systemic damage could be suppressed by naturally occurring plant Coccinia grandis [14]; ethanol extract of Coccinia grandis leaves have a great source of in vivo antioxidant and free radical neutralizing activity [58] due to the presence of so many bioactive compounds with different therapeutic properties to reduce the generation of ROS in the body by MSG mixed HLD [14]. Moreover, it also beneficially attenuate metabolic disturbances, dyslipidemic condition, inflammation, programmed cell death, and combat against the effects of co-administration of monosodium glutamate mixed high lipid diet-induced non-alcoholic fatty liver disease associated systemic anomalies [14].

Hence, it can be further suggested that as an alternative to synthetic drugs with different side effects, it seems to be the viable strategy of management to use naturally occurring plant extract (i.e., Coccinia grandis) with minimal or without side effects against flavor-enhancing HLD induced damage in the body. Furthermore, it can be postulated that inhibition of the target pathway or use of inhibitors or blockers to the targeted pathway by which MSG or HLD, or MH exert their adverse effects on animals and the human body may be another alternative molecular approach of therapies.

7 Conclusions

The present review warns about MSG or HLD alone, or MSG mixed HLD as ready-made foods. Their adverse effects on different systems enlighten the dietary risk factors that may be considered to make awareness among ordinary people about their food habits. This initiative is very much needed to cause the threat of metabolic disorder imperative as well as systemic damage. So, as the source of both trans-fatty acids, saturated fatty acids in partially hydrogenated or hydrogenated and MSG as flavor enhancers have adverse health effects. To combat these negative effects, we should modify our diet with good sources of antioxidants, high-dietary fiber with PUFA and MUFA as an alternative source of saturated fatty acids, trans-fatty acids, and hydrogenated fats in preparation of dishes. Moreover, MSG and HLD exerted deleterious effects by modulating different signaling cascades to cause dyslipidemia via altered LDL/HDL and leptin/adiponectin ratio, OS via generation of ROS with altered redox-homeostasis, inflammatory response via altering the balance of pro-inflammatory/anti-inflammatory factors, apoptosis via stimulating apoptotic mediator and thereby systemic damages; different animal models are now being developed to understand the pathways involved in systemic anomalies and cancer by MSG/HLD; however, further experiments are needed to confirm whether these signal pathways are physiologically valid for humans or not and at the same time, it is very important to find the transcription factors and genes involved in this systemic injury or even cancer.

Grants, sponsors, and funding sources

Not applicable.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors report no declarations of interest.

Acknowledgements

Authors are grateful to Prof. Dhrubajyoti Chattopadhyay (Vice Chancellor of Sister Nivedita University, Kolkata), Prof. Gautam Kumar Basu (Vice Chancellor of Maharaja Bir Bikram University, Agartala, Tripura) and Dr. Sumit Sarkar (Research Biologist, Division of Neurotoxicology, National Center for Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, USA) for their continuous encouragement and valuable suggestions. The authors are indebted to Ms. Debasmita Das, Mr. Sandipan Roy, Mr. Rajarshi Paul (Department of Physiology, Serampore College) and Dr. Arup Kumar Sen (Associate Professor, Department of Commerce, Serampore College) for their help and suggestions during preparation of the manuscript.
==== Refs
References

1 Cai H. Cong W.N. Daimon C.M. Wang R. Tschöp M.H. Sévigny J. Altered lipid and salt taste responsivity in ghrelin and GOAT null mice PLoS One 8 10 2013 e76553 10.1371/journal.pone.0076553
2 Alkerwi A. Crichton G.E. Hébert J.R. Consumption of ready-made meals and increased risk of obesity: findings from the Observation of cardiovascular Risk Factors in Luxembourg (ORISCAV-LUX) study Br. J. Nutr. 113 2 2015 270 277 10.1017/S0007114514003468 25488071
3 Banerjee A. Das D. Paul R. Roy S. Bhattacharjee A. Prasad S.K. Altered composition of high-lipid diet may generate reactive oxygen species by disturbing the balance of antioxidant and free radicals J. Basic Clin. Physiol. Pharmacol. 31 3 2020 15 20 10.1515/jbcpp-2019-0141
4 Margina D. Ungurianu A. Purdel C. Nițulescu G.M. Tsoukalas D. Sarandi E. Thanasoula M. Burykina T.I. Tekos F. Buha A. Nikitovic D. Kouretas D. Tsatsakis A.M. Analysis of the intricate effects of polyunsaturated fatty acids and polyphenols on inflammatory pathways in health and disease Food Chem. Toxicol. 143 2020 111558 10.1016/j.fct.2020.111558
5 Margina D. Ungurianu A. Purdel C. Tsoukalas D. Sarandi E. Thanasoula M. Tekos F. Mesnage R. Kouretas D. Tsatsakis A. Chronic inflammation in the context of everyday life: dietary changes as mitigating factors Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 17 11 2020 4135 10.3390/ijerph17114135
6 Ashakiran S. Kiran D. Fast-foods and their impact on health JKIMSU 1 2012 7 15
7 Roizman T. Reasons eating junk food is not good SF Gate (Demand Media) 2015 (accessed 29 March, 2015) https://healthyeating.sfgate.com/reasons-eating-junk-food-not-good-3364.html
8 Bhoge N.Y. Junk food and human health: a synoptic review IJTAS 7 2015 51 55
9 Rahimi A.F. Baradaran R. Ghandy N. Effects of monosodium glutamate on apoptosis of germ cells in testicular tissue of adult rat: an experimental study Int. J. Reprod. Biomed. Yazd (Yazd) 17 4 2019 261 270
10 Kazmi Z. Fatima I. Perveen S. Malik S.S. Monosodium glutamate: review on clinical reports Int. J. Food Prop. 20 2017 1 9 10.1080/10942912.2017.1295260
11 Zanfirescu A. Ungurianu A. Tsatsakis A.M. Nițulescu G.M. Kouretas D. Veskoukis A. A review of the alleged health hazards of monosodium glutamate Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 18 4 2019 1111 1134 10.1111/1541-4337.12448 31920467
12 Bhaskar R. Ola M. Junk food: impact on health J. Drug Deliv. Ther. 2 3 2012 67 73 10.22270/jddt.v2i3.132
13 Insawang T. Selmi C. Cha’on U. Pethlert S. Yongvanit P. Areejitranusorn P. Monosodium glutamate (MSG) intake is associated with the prevalence of metabolic syndrome in a rural Thai population Nutr. Metab. 9 1 2012 50 10.1186/1743-7075-9-50
14 Banerjee A. Das D. Paul R. Roy S. Das U. Saha S. Mechanistic study of attenuation of monosodium glutamate mixed high lipid diet induced systemic damage in rats by Coccinia grandis Scientific Reports. Scientific Reports 10 2020 15443 10.1038/s41598-020-72076-6 32963259
15 Gradinaru D. Margina D. Borsa C. Ionescu C. Ilie M. Costache M. Dinischiotu A. Prada G.I. Adiponectin: possible link between metabolic stress and oxidative stress in the elderly Aging Clin. Exp. Res. 29 4 2017 621 629 10.1007/s40520-016-0629-z 27688246
16 Gradinaru D. Khaddour H. Margina D. Ungurianu A. Borsa C. Ionescu C. Prada G.I. Usher J. Elshimali Y. Insulin-leptin Axis, cardiometabolic risk and oxidative stress in elderly with metabolic syndrome Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes 2018 10.1055/s-0043-123825
17 Ungurianu A. Seremet O. Gradinaru D. Ionescu‐Tirgoviște C. Margina D. Miulescu R.D. Spectrophotometric versus spectrofluorometric assessment in the study of the relationships between lipid peroxidation and metabolic dysregulation Chem. Biol. Dug Design 2019 10.1111/cbdd.13474
18 Chazelas E. Deschasaux M. Srour B. Kesse-Guyot E. Julia C. Food additives: distribution and co-occurrence in 126,000 food products of the French market Sci. Rep. 10 1 2020 3980 10.1038/s41598-020-60948-w 32132606
19 Schulte E.M. Avena N.M. Gearhardt A.N. Which foods may be addictive? The roles of processing, fat content, and glycemic load PLoS One 10 2 2015 e0117959 10.1371/journal.pone.0117959
20 ANSES Etude Individuelle Nationale Des Consommations Alimentaires 3 (INCA 3) 2017
21 Shridhar G. Rajendra N. Murigendra H. Shridevi P. Prasad M. Mujeeb M.A. Modern diet and its impact on human health J. Nutr. Food Sci. 5 2015 10.4172/2155-9600.1000430
22 Araujo T.R. Freitas I.N. Vettorazzi J.F. Batista T.M. Santos-Silva J.C.S. Bonfleur M.L. Benefits of L-alanine or L-arginine supplementation against adiposity and glucose intolerance in monosodium glutamate-induced obesity Eur. J. Nutr. 56 6 2017 2069 2080 10.1007/s00394-016-1245-6 27317126
23 He K. Du S. Xun P. Sharma S. Wang H. Zhai F. Popkin B. Consumption of monosodium glutamate in relation to incidence of overweight in Chinese adults: china Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS) Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 93 6 2011 1328 1336 10.3945/ajcn.110.008870 21471280
24 Bawaskar H.S. Bawaskar P.H. Bawaskar P.H. Chinese restaurant syndrome Indian J. Crit. Care Med. 21 1 2017 49 50 10.4103/0972-5229.198327 28197052
25 Ainsworth B.E. Macera C.A. Promoting physical activity in a public health context J. Sport Health Sci. 7 1 2018 1 2 10.1016/j.jshs.2017.10.004 30356454
26 Ataseven N. Yuzbaşıoglu D. Keskin A.Ç Ünal F. Genotoxicity of monosodium glutamate Food Chem. Toxicol. 91 2016 8 18 10.1016/j.fct.2016.02.021 26929995
27 Chakraborty S.P. Patho-physiological and toxicological aspects of monosodium glutamate Toxicol. Mech. Methods 29 6 2019 389 396 10.1080/15376516.2018.1528649 30273089
28 Bera T.K. Kar S.K. Yadav P.K. Mukherjee P. Yadav S. Joshi B. Effects of monosodium glutamate on human health: a systematic review World J. Pharm. Res. 5 2017 139 144
29 Biodun D. Biodun A. A spice or poison? Is monosodium glutamate safe for human consumption? National Concord 1993 5
30 Solomon U. Gabriel O.O. Henry E.O. Adrian I.O. Anthony T.E. Effect of monosodium glutamate on behavioral phenotypes, biomarkers of oxidative stress in brain tissues and liver enzymes in mice World J. Neurosci. 5 2015 339 349
31 Rothman S.M. Olney J.W. Excitotoxicity and the NMDA receptor--Still lethal after eight years Trends Neurosci. 18 2 1995 57 58 10.1016/0166-2236(95)93869-y 7537407
32 Rogers P.J. Blundell J.E. Umami and appetite: effects of monosodium glutamate on hunger and food intake in human subjects Physiol. Behav. 48 6 1990 801 804 10.1016/0031-9384(90)90230-2 2087510
33 Halpern B.P. Glutamate and the flavor of foods J. Nutr. 130 4S Suppl 2000 910S 914S 10.1093/jn/130.4.910S 10736351
34 Niaz K. Zaplatic E. Spoor J. Extensive use of monosodium glutamate: A threat to public health? EXCLI 17 2018 273 278
35 Hernández Bautista R.J. Mahmoud A.M. Königsberg M. DGNE L.ópez Obesity: pathophysiology, monosodium glutamate-induced model and anti-obesity medicinal plants Biomed. Pharmacother. 111 2019 503 516 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.12.108 30597304
36 Geha R.S. Beiser A. Ren C. Review of allergic reaction to monosodium glutamate and outcome of a multicenter double blind placebo controlled study J. Nutr. 130 2001 1058S 1062S
37 Shi Z. Yuan B. Taylor A.W. Dal Grande E.D. Wittert G.A. Monosodium glutamate intake increases hemoglobin level over 5 years among Chinese adults Amino Acids 43 3 2012 1389 1397 10.1007/s00726-011-1213-7 22222358
38 Onakewhor J.U.E. Oforofuo I.A.O. Singh S.P. Chronic administration of monosodium glutamate induces oligozoospermia and glycogen administration in Wistar rat testes Afr. J. Reprod. Health 2 1998 190 197
39 Oforofuo I.A.O. Onakewhor J.U.E. Idaewor P.E. The effect of chronic administration of MSG on the histology of the adult Wistar rat testes Bioresearch Communications 9 1997 30 56
40 Samuels A. The toxicity/safety of processed free glutamic acid (MSG): a study in suppression of information Account. Res. 6 4 1999 259 310 10.1080/08989629908573933 11657840
41 Nnadozie J.O. Chijioke U.O. Okafor O.C. Olusina D.B. Oli A.N. Nwonu P.C. Chronic toxicity of low dose monosodium glutamate in albino Wistar rats BMC Res. Notes 12 1 2019 593 10.1186/s13104-019-4611-7 31533812
42 Yang W.H. Drouin M.A. Herbert M. Mao Y. Karsh J. The monosodium glutamate symptom complex: assessment in a double-blind placebo-controlled randomized study J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 99 6 Pt 1 1997 757 762 10.1016/s0091-6749(97)80008-5 9215242
43 Beyreuther K. Biesalski H.K. Fernstrom J.D. Grimm P. Hammes W.P. Heinemann U. Consensus meeting: monosodium glutamate-an update Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 61 3 2007 304 313 10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602526 16957679
44 Rhodes J. Titherley A.C. Norman J.A. Wood R. Lord D.W. A survey of the monosodium glutamate content of foods and an estimation of the dietary intake of monosodium glutamate Food Addit. Contam. 8 5 1991 663 672 10.1080/02652039109374021 1818840
45 Freeman M. Reconsidering the Effects of monosodium glutamate: a literature review J. Am. Acad. Nurse Pract. 18 10 2006 482 486 10.1111/j.1745-7599.2006.00160.x 16999713
46 Campos-Sepúlveda A.E. Martínez E.M.E. Rodríguez A.R. Peláez L.E. Rodríguez A.A.L. Cadena R.A. Neonatal monosodium glutamate administration increases aminooxyacetic acid (AOA) susceptibility effects in adult mice Proc. West. Pharmacol. Soc. 52 2009 72 74 22128428
47 Onaolapo O.J. Onaolapo A.Y. Akanmu M.A. Gbola O. Evidence of alterations in brain structure and antioxidant status following “low-dose” monosodium glutamate ingestion Pathophysiology 23 3 2016 147 156 10.1016/j.pathophys.2016.05.001 27312658
48 Sadek K. Abouzed T. Nasr S. Lycopene modulates cholinergic dysfunction, Bcl-2/Bax balance, and antioxidant enzymes gene transcripts in monosodium glutamate (E621) induced neurotoxicity in a rat model Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 94 4 2016 394 401 10.1139/cjpp-2015-0388 26900785
49 Mattson M.P. Glutamate and neurotrophic factors in neuronal plasticity and disease Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1144 2008 97 112 10.1196/annals.1418.005 19076369
50 Swamy A.H. Patel N.L. Gadad P.C. Koti B.C. Patel U.M. Thippeswamy A.H. Manjula D.V. Neuroprotective activity of Pongamiapinnata in monosodium glutamate-induced neurotoxicity in rats Indian J. Pharm. Sci. 75 6 2013 657 663 24591740
51 Husarova V.M. Ostatnikova D. Monosodium glutamate toxic effects and their implications for human intake: a review Jmed Res. 2013 2013 1 12 10.5171/2013.608765
52 Bannai M. Torii K. Digestive physiology of the pigsymposium: detection of dietaryglutamate via gut-brainaxis J. Anim. Sci. 91 5 2013 1974 1981 10.2527/jas.2012-6021 23345555
53 Dief A.E. Kamha E.S. Baraka A.M. Elshorbagy A.K. Monosodium glutamate neurotoxicity increases beta amyloid in the rat hippocampus: a potential role for cyclic AMP protein kinase Neurotoxicology 42 2014 76 82 10.1016/j.neuro.2014.04.003 24769037
54 Henry-Unaeze H.N.H. Update on food safety of monosodium l-glutamate (MSG) Pathophysiology 24 4 2017 243 249 10.1016/j.pathophys.2017.08.001 28943112
55 Walker R. Lupien J.R. The safety evaluation of monosodium glutamate J. Nutr. 130 4S Suppl 2000 1049S 1052S 10.1093/jn/130.4.1049S 10736380
56 Smith Q.R. Transport of glutamate and other amino acids at the blood–brain barrier J. Nutr. 130 4S Suppl 2000 1016S 1022S 10.1093/jn/130.4.1016S 10736373
57 Kumar P. Bhandari U. Protective effect of Trigonella foenum-GraecumLinn. on monosodium glutamate-induced dyslipidemia and oxidative stress in rats Indian J. Pharmacol. 45 2013 136 140 10.4103/0253-7613.108288 23716888
58 Banerjee A. Mukherjee S. Maji B.K. Efficacy of Coccinia grandis against monosodium glutamate induced hepato-cardiac anomalies by inhibiting NF-kB and caspase 3 mediated signalling in rat model Hum. Exp. Toxicol. 2021 10.1177/09603271211010895
59 Liu Y. Zhou L. Xu H.F. Yan L. Ding F. Hao W. A preliminary experimental study on the cardiac toxicity of glutamate and the role of alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor in rats Chin. Med. J. 126 7 2013 1323 1332 23557566
60 Shi Z. Luscombe-Marsh N.D.L. Wittert G.A. Yuan B. Dai Y. Pan X. Taylor A.W. Monosodium glutamate is not associated with obesity or a greater prevalence of weight gain over 5 years: findings from the Jiangsu Nutrition Study of Chinese adults Br. J. Nutr. 104 3 2010 457 463 10.1017/S0007114510000760 20370941
61 Konrad D. Wueest S. The gut-adipose-liver axis in the metabolic syndrome Physiology 29 5 2014 304 313 10.1152/physiol.00014.2014 25180260
62 Airaodion A.I. Ogbuagu E.O. Osemwowa E.U. Ogbuagu U. Esonu C.E. Agunbiade A.P. Toxicological effect of monosodium glutamate in seasonings on human health Global Journal of Nutrition and Food Science 1 5 2019 10.33552/GJNFS.2019.01.000522
63 Takai A. Kikuchi K. Kajiyama Y. Sugiura A. Negishi M. Tsunashima H. Serological and histological examination of a nonalcoholic steatohepatitis mouse model created via the administration of monosodium glutamate Int. Sch. Res. Notices 2014 2014 725351 10.1155/2014/725351
64 Park E.J. Lee J.H. Yu GY He G. Ali S.R. Holzer R.G. Dietary and genetic obesity promote liver inflammation and tumorigenesis by enhancing IL-6 and TNF expression Cell 140 2 2010 197 208 10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.052 20141834
65 Siegel A.B. Zhu A.X. Metabolic syndrome and hepatocellular carcinoma: two growing epidemics with a potential link Cancer 115 24 2009 5651 5661 10.1002/cncr.24687 19834957
66 Triantafyllou E. Woollard K.J. McPhail M.J.W. Antoniades C.G. Possamai L.A. The role of monocytes and macrophages in acute and acute-on-chronic liver failure Front. Immunol. 9 2018 2948 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02948 30619308
67 Nakanishi Y. Tsuneyama K. Fujimoto M. Salunga T.L. Nomoto K. An J.L. Monosodium glutamate (MSG): a villain and promoter of liver inflammation and dysplasia J. Autoimmun. 30 1–2 2008 42 50 10.1016/j.jaut.2007.11.016 18178378
68 Waer H.F. Edress S. The effect of monosodium glutamate (MSG) on rat liver and the ameliorating effect of “guanidino ethane sulfonic acid (GES)” (Histological, Histochemical and Electron microscopy Studies) Egypt. J. Hosp. Med. 24 2006 524 538
69 Onyema O.O. Farombi E.O. Emerole G.O. Ukoha A.I. Onyeze G.O. Effect of vitamin E on monosodium glutamate induced hepatotoxicity and oxidative stress in rats Indian J. Biochem. Biophys. 43 1 2006 20 24 16955747
70 Fujimoto M. Tsuneyama K. Nakanishi Y. Salunga T.L. Nomoto K. Sasaki Y. A dietary restriction influences the progression but not the initiation of MSG-Induced nonalcoholic steatohepatitis J. Med. Food 17 3 2014 374 383 10.1089/jmf.2012.0029 24588719
71 El-Meghawry El-Kenawy A. Osman H.E. Daghestani M.H. The effect of vitamin C administration on monosodium glutamate induced liver injury. An experimental study Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 65 5 2013 513 521 10.1016/j.etp.2012.02.007 22658673
72 Nosseir N.S. Ali M.H.M. Ebaid H.M. A histological and morphometric study of monosodium glutamate toxic effect on testicular structure and potentiality of recovery in adult albino rats Res. J. Biol. Sci. 2 2012 66 78
73 Eweka A. Om’iniabohs F. Histological studies of the effects of monosodium glutamate on the ovaries of adult Wistar rats Ann. Med. Health Sci. Res. 1 1 2011 37 43 23209953
74 Eweka A.O. Eweka A.O. Om’iniabohs F.A. Histological studies of the effects of monosodium glutamate of the fallopian tubes of adult female Wistar rats N. Am. J. Med. Sci. 2 3 2010 146 149 10.4297/najms.2010.3146 22624130
75 Mondal M. Sarkar K. Nath P.P. Paul G. Monosodium glutamate suppresses the female reproductive function by impairing the functions of ovary and uterus in rat Environ. Toxicol. 33 2 2018 198 208 10.1002/tox.22508 29119727
76 Abdollahzadeh A. Kianifard D. Saiah G.V. Study of the long-term and dose dependent effects of methylphenidate and monosodium glutamate on the hormonal alterations of the pituitary-testicular axis and sperm analysis in adolescence rats Bull. Univ. Agri. Sci. Vet. Med. 74 1 2017 75 81 10.15835/buasvmcn-vm:12607
77 Miśkowiak B. Limanowski A. Partyka M. Effect of perinatal administration of monosodium glutamate (MSG) on the reproductive system of the male rat Endokrynol. Pol. 44 4 1993 497 505 8055818
78 Storto M. Sallese M. Salvatore L. Poulet R. Condorelli D.F. Dell’Albani P. Expression of metabotropic glutamate receptors in the rat and human testis J. Endocrinol. 170 1 2001 71 78 10.1677/joe.0.1700071 11431139
79 Pavlović V. Cekić S. Kocić G. Sokolović D. Zivković V. Effect of monosodium glutamate on apoptosis and Bcl-2/Bax protein level in rat thymocyte culture Physiol. Res. 56 5 2007 619 626 17184147
80 Yu T. Zhao Y. Shi W. Ma R. Yu L. Effects of maternal oral administration of monosodium glutamate at a late stage of pregnancy on developing mouse fetal brain Brain Res. 747 2 1997 195 206 10.1016/s0006-8993(96)01181-x 9045994
81 Yu L. Zhang Y. Ma R. Bao L. Fang J. Yu T. Potent protection of ferulic acid against excitotoxic effects of maternal intragastric administration of monosodium glutamate at a late stage of pregnancy on developing mouse fetal brain Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 16 3 2006 170 177 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2005.08.006 16257184
82 Pongking T. Haonon O. Dangtakot R. Onsurathum S. Jusakul A. Intuyod K. A combination of monosodium glutamate and high-fat and high-fructose diets increases the risk of kidney injury, gut dysbiosis and host-microbial co-metabolism PLoS One 15 4 2020 e0231237 10.1371/journal.pone.0231237
83 Peng Q.N. Huo D.X. Ma C.C. Jiang S.M. Wang L.S. Zhang J.C. Monosodium glutamate induces limited modulation in gut microbiota J. Funct. Foods 49 2018 493 500 10.1016/j.jff.2018.09.015
84 Jiang S. Xie S. Lv D. Zhang Y. Deng J. Zeng L. Chen Y. A reduction in the butyrate producing species Roseburia spp. And Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is associated with chronic kidney disease progression Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 109 10 2016 1389 1396 10.1007/s10482-016-0737-y 27431681
85 Sharma A. Prasongwattana V. Cha’on U. Selmi C. Hipkaeo W. Boonnate P. Monosodium glutamate (MSG) consumption is associated with urolithiasis and urinary tract obstruction in rats PLoS One 8 9 2013 e75546 10.1371/journal.pone.0075546
86 Sampson N. Koziel R. Zenzmaier C. Bubendorf L. Plas E. Jansen-Dürr P.J. Berger P. ROS signaling by NOX4 drives fibroblast-to-myofibroblast differentiation in the diseased prostatic stroma Mol. Endocrinol. 25 3 2011 503 515 10.1210/me.2010-0340 21273445
87 Sharma A. Monosodium glutamate-induced oxidative kidney damage and possible mechanisms: a mini-review J. Biomed. Sci. 22 2015 93 10.1186/s12929-015-0192-5 26493866
88 Ortiz G.G. Bitzer-Quintero O.K. Zárate C.B. Rodríguez-Reynoso S. Larios-Arceo F. Monosodium glutamate-induced damage in liver and kidney: a morphological and biochemical approach Biomed. Pharmacother. 60 2 2006 86 91 10.1016/j.biopha.2005.07.012 16488110
89 Paul M.V. Abhilash M. Varghese M.V. Alex M. Nair R.H. Protective effects of alpha-tocopherol against oxidative stress related to nephrotoxicity by monosodium glutamate in rats Toxicol. Mech. Methods 22 8 2012 625 630 10.3109/15376516.2012.714008 22827614
90 Sharma A. Wongkham C. Prasongwattana V. Boonnate P. Thanan R. Reungjui S. Cha’on U. Proteomic analysis of kidney in rats chronically exposed to monosodium glutamate PLoS One 9 12 2014 e116233 10.1371/journal.pone.0116233
91 Willard S.S. Koochekpour S. Glutamate, glutamate receptors, and downstream signaling pathways Int. J. Biol. Sci. 9 9 2013 948 959 10.7150/ijbs.6426 24155668
92 Leung J.C. Marphis T. Craver R.D. Silverstein D.M. Altered NMDA receptor expression in renal toxicity: protection with a receptor antagonist Kidney Int. 66 1 2004 167 176 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00718.x 15200423
93 Leung J.C. Ragland N. Marphis T. Silverstein D.M. NMDA agonists and antagonists induce renal culture cell toxicity Med. Chem. (Los Angeles) 4 6 2008 565 571 10.2174/157340608786242034
94 Lan J.Y. Skeberdis V.A. Jover T. Grooms S.Y. Lin Y. Araneda R.C. Protein kinase C modulates NMDA receptor trafficking and gating Nat. Neurosci. 4 4 2001 382 390 10.1038/86028 11276228
95 Said S.I. Berisha H.I. Pakbaz H. Excitotoxicity in the lung: N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced, nitric oxide-dependent, pulmonary edema is attenuated by vasoactive intestinal peptide and by inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93 10 1996 4688 4692 10.1073/pnas.93.10.4688 8643465
96 Babu G.N. Bawari M. Ali M.M. Lipid peroxidation potential and antioxidant status of circumventricular organs of rat brain following neonatal monosodium glutamate Neurotoxicology 15 3 1994 773 777 7854619
97 Dixon S.J. Patel D.N. Welsch M. Skouta R. Lee E.D. Hayano M. Pharmacological inhibition of cystine-glutamate exchange induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and ferroptosis eLife 3 2014 e02523 10.7554/eLife.02523
98 Cao J.Y. Dixon S.J. Mechanisms of ferroptosis Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 73 11–12 2016 2195 2209 10.1007/s00018-016-2194-1 27048822
99 Murphy E.A. Velazquez K.T. Herbert K.M. Influence of high-fat diet on gut microbiota: a driving force for chronic disease risk Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 18 5 2015 515 520 10.1097/MCO.0000000000000209 26154278
100 Corda S. Laplace C. Vicaut E. Duranteau J. Rapid reactive oxygen species production by mitochondria in endothelial cells exposed to tumor necrosis factor-alpha is mediated by ceramide Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 24 6 2001 762 768 10.1165/ajrcmb.24.6.4228 11415943
101 Stankiewicz A. Skrzydlewska E. Makieła M. Effects of amifostine on liver oxidative stress caused by cyclophosphamide administration to rats Drug Metabol. Drug Interact. 19 2 2002 67 82 10.1515/dmdi.2002.19.2.67 12751907
102 Panatier A. Theodosis D.T. Mothet J.P. Touquet B. Pollegioni L. Poulain D.A. Oliet S.H.R. Glia-derived d-serine controls NMDA receptor activity and synaptic memory Cell 125 4 2006 775 784 10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.051 16713567
103 Gill S.S. Pulido O.M. Glutamate receptors in peripheral tissues: current knowledge, future research, and implications for toxicology Toxicol. Pathol. 29 2 2001 208 223 10.1080/019262301317052486 11421488
104 Mráček T. Drahota Z. Houštěk J. The function and the role of the mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase in mammalian tissues Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1827 3 2013 401 410 10.1016/j.bbabio.2012.11.014 23220394
105 Colussi C. Albertini M.C. Coppola S. Rovidati S. Galli F. Ghibelli L. H2O2-induced block of glycolysis as an active ADP-ribosylation reaction protecting cells from apoptosis Faseb J. 14 14 2000 2266 2276 10.1096/fj.00-0074com 11053248
106 Tanabe A. Egashira Y. Fukuoka S. Shibata K. Sanada H. Expression of rat hepatic 2-amino-3-carboxymuconate-6-semialdehyde decarboxylase is affected by a high protein diet and by streptozotocin-induced diabetes J. Nutr. 132 6 2002 1153 1159 10.1093/jn/132.6.1153 12042425
107 Zhang H. Ding L. Fang X. Shi Z. Zhang Y. Chen H. Biological responses to perfluorododecanoic acid exposure in rat kidneys as determined by integrated proteomic and metabonomic studies PLoS One 6 6 2011 e20862 10.1371/journal.pone.0020862
108 Jovic Z. Veselinovic M. Vasic K. Stankovic-Djordjevic D.S. Cekic S. Milovanovic M. Sarac M. Monosodium glutamate induces apoptosis in naive and memory human B cells Bratisl. Lek. Listy 110 10 2009 636 640 20017456
109 Falalyeyeva T.M. Leschenko I.V. Beregova T.V. Lazarenko L.M. Savchuk O.M. Sichel L.M. Probiotic strains of lactobacilli and bifidobacteria alter pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines production in rats with monosodium glutamate-induced obesity Fiziolohichnyä­ Zhurnal 63 1 2017 17 25 10.15407/fz63.01.017
110 Castrogiovanni D. Gaillard R.C. Giovambattista A. Spinedi E. Neuroendocrine, metabolic and immune functions during the acute phase response of inflammatory stress in monosodium l-glutamate-damaged, hyperadipose male rat Neuroendocrinology 88 3 2008 227 234 10.1159/000124131 18382067
111 Kohan A.B. Yang Q. Xu M. Lee D. Tso P. Monosodium glutamate inhibits the lymphatic transport of lipids in the rat Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 311 4 2016 G648 G654 10.1152/ajpgi.00342.2014 27514481
112 Nakadate K. Motojima K. Hirakawa T.T. Tanaka-Nakadate S.T. Progressive depletion of rough endoplasmic reticulum in epithelial cells of the small intestine in monosodium glutamate mice model of obesity Biomed Res. Int. 2016 2016 5251738 10.1155/2016/5251738
113 Peláez B. Blázquez J.L. Pastor F.E. Sánchez A. Amat P. Lectinhistochemistry and ultrastructure of microglial response to monosodium glutamate-mediated neurotoxicity in the arcuate nucleus Histol. Histopathol. 14 1 1999 165 174 10.14670/HH-14.165 9987662
114 Kato K. Hamada N. Mizukoshi N. Yamamoto K. Kimura T. Ishihara C. Depression of delayed-type hypersensitivity in mice with hypothalamic lesion induced by monosodium glutamate: involvement of neuroendocrine system in immunomodulation Immunology 58 3 1986 389 395 3015779
115 Belluardo N. Mudò G. Bindoni M. Effects of early destruction of the mouse arcuate nucleus by monosodium glutamate on age-dependent natural killer activity Brain Res. 534 1–2 1990 225 233 10.1016/0006-8993(90)90132-u 1963560
116 Hernández-Bautista R.J. Alarcón-Aguilar F.J. Del C Escobar-Villanueva M. Almanza-Pérez J.C. Merino-Aguilar H. Fainstein M.K. López-Diazguerrero N.E. Biochemical alterations during the obese-aging process in female and male monosodium glutamate (MSG)-treated mice Int. J. Mol. Sci. 15 7 2014 11473 11494 10.3390/ijms150711473 24979131
117 Tchkonia T. Morbeck D.E. Von Zglinicki T. Van Deursen J. Lustgarten J. Fat tissue, aging, and cellular senescence Aging Cell 9 5 2010 667 684 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2010.00608.x 20701600
118 Roman-Ramos R. Almanza-Perez J.C. Garcia-Macedo R. Blancas-Flores G. Fortis-Barrera A. Monosodium glutamate neonatal intoxication associated with obesity in adult stage is characterized by chronic inflammation and increased mRNA expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors in mice Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 108 6 2011 406 413 10.1111/j.1742-7843.2011.00671.x 21205225
119 Hoang B.X. Levine S.A. Pham P. Shaw D.G. Hypothesis of the cause and development of neoplasms Eur. J. Cancer Prevent. 16 1 2007 55 61 10.1097/01.cej.0000220636.15976.4c
120 Dluzen D.F. Lazarus P. MicroRNA regulation of the major drug-metabolizing enzymes and related transcription factors Drug Metab. Rev. 47 3 2015 320 334 10.3109/03602532.2015.1076438 26300547
121 Matoušková P. Bártíková H. Boušová I. Levorová L. Szotáková B. Skálová L. Drug-metabolizing and antioxidant enzymes in monosodium l-glutamate obese mice Drug Metab. Dispos. 43 2 2015 258 265 10.1124/dmd.114.061176 25473020
122 Beyerle J. Frei E. Stiborova M. Habermann N. Ulrich C.M. Biotransformation of xenobiotics in the human colon and rectum and its association with colorectal cancer Drug Metab. Rev. 47 2 2015 199 221 10.3109/03602532.2014.996649 25686853
123 Miyazaki T. Shirakami Y. Kubota M. Ideta T. Kochi T. Sakai H. Sodium alginate prevents progression of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis and liver carcinogenesis in obese and diabetic mice Oncotarget 7 9 2016 10448 10458 10.18632/oncotarget.7249 26871288
124 Hata K. Kubota M. Shimizu M. Moriwaki H. Kuno T. Tanaka T. Monosodium glutamate-induced diabetic mice are susceptible to azoxymethane-induced colon tumorigenesis Carcinogenesis 33 3 2012 702 707 10.1093/carcin/bgr323 22223845
125 Scalise M. Pochini L. Galluccio M. Console L. Indiveri C. Glutamine transport and mitochondrial metabolism in cancer cell growth Front. Oncol. 7 2017 306 10.3389/fonc.2017.00306 29376023
126 de Queiroz E.A.I.F. Akamine E.H. de Carvalho M.H.C. Sampaio S.C. Fortes Z.B. Metformin reduces the Walker-256 tumor development in obese-MSG rats via AMPK and FOXO3a Life Sci. 121 2015 78 87 10.1016/j.lfs.2014.11.028 25497710
127 Fonseca E.A.I. de Oliveira M.A. Lobato Nde S. Akamine E.H. Colquhoun A. de Carvalho M.H.C. Metformin reduces the stimulatory effect of obesity on in vivo Walker-256 tumor development and increases the area of tumor necrosis Life Sci. 88 19–20 2011 846 852 10.1016/j.lfs.2011.03.005 21439974
128 Huang M. Narita S. Inoue T. Koizumi A. Saito M. Tsuruta H. Fatty acid binding protein 4 enhances prostate cancer progression by upregulating matrix metalloproteinases and stromal cell cytokine production Oncotarget 8 67 2017 111780 111794 10.18632/oncotarget.22908 29340091
129 Huang X.T. Yue S.J. Li C. Huang Y.H. Cheng Q.M. Li X.H. A sustained activation of pancreatic NMDARs is a novel factor of β-Cell apoptosis and dysfunction Endocrinology 158 11 2017 3900 3913 10.1210/en.2017-00366 28938426
130 Afifi M.M. Abbas A.M. Monosodium glutamate versus diet induced obesity in pregnant rats and their offspring Acta Physiol. Hung. 98 2 2011 177 188 10.1556/APhysiol.98.2011.2.9 21616776
131 Seiva F.R.F. Chuffa L.G.A. Braga C.P. Amorim J.P.A. Fernandes A.A.H. Quercetin ameliorates glucose and lipid metabolism and improves antioxidant status in postnatally monosodium glutamate-induced metabolic alterations Food Chem. Toxicol. 50 10 2012 3556 3561 10.1016/j.fct.2012.07.009 22809473
132 Ancoli-Israel S.A. Kripke D.F. Klauber M.R. Fell R. Stepnowsky C. Estline E. Morbidity, mortality and sleep-disordered breathing in community dwelling elderly Sleep 19 4 1996 277 282 10.1093/sleep/19.4.277 8776783
133 Shi Z. Wittert G.A. Yuan B. Dai Y. Gill T.K. Hu G. Association between monosodium glutamate intake and sleep-disordered breathing among Chinese adults with normal body weight Nutrition 29 3 2013 508 513 10.1016/j.nut.2012.08.011 23274090
134 Moss D. Ma A. Cameron D.P. Defective thermoregulatory thermogenesis in monosodium glutamate-inducedobesity in mice Metab. Clin. Exp. 34 7 1985 626 630 10.1016/0026-0495(85)90089-7 4010523
135 Huang X.T. Li C. Peng X.P. Guo J. Yue S.J. Liu W. An excessive increase in glutamate contributes to glucose-toxicity in β-cells via activation of pancreatic NMDA receptors in rodent diabetes Sci. Rep. 7 2017 44120 10.1038/srep44120 28303894
136 Leite Nde C. Ferreira T.R. Rickli S. Borck P.C. Mathias P.C.F. Emilio H.R.O. Grassiolli S. Glycolytic and mitochondrial metabolism in pancreatic islets from MSG-treated obese rats subjected to swimming training Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 31 2–3 2013 242 256 10.1159/000343365 23466813
137 Tanner L.B. Goglia A.G. Wei M.H. Sehgal T. Parsons L.R. Park J.O. Four key steps control glycolytic flux in mammalian cells Cell Syst. 7 1 2018 49 62.e8 10.1016/j.cels.2018.06.003 29960885
138 Geha R.S. Beiser A. Ren C. Patterson R. Greenberger P.A. Grammer L.C. Review of alleged reaction to monosodium glutamate and outcome of a multicenter double-blind placebo-controlled study J. Nutr. 130 4S Suppl 2000 1058S 1062S 10.1093/jn/130.4.1058S 10736382
139 Matfin G. The metabolic syndrome: What’s in a name? Ther. Adv. Endocrinol. Metab. 1 2 2010 39 45 10.1177/2042018810374290 23148148
140 Li M. Li Y. Liu J. Metabolic syndrome with hyperglycemia and the risk of ischemic stroke Yonsei Med. J. 54 2 2013 283 287 10.3349/ymj.2013.54.2.283 23364957
141 Siegel G. Ermilov E. Knes O. Rodríguez M. ). Combined lowering of low grade systemic inflammation and insulin resistance in metabolic syndrome patients treated with Ginkgo biloba Atherosclerosis 237 2 2014 584 588 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.10.023 25463092
142 Boonnate P. Waraasawapati S. Hipkaeo W. Pethlert S. Sharma A. Selmi C. Monosodium glutamate dietary consumption decreases pancreatic β-Cell mass in adult wistar rats PLoS One 10 6 2015 e0131595 10.1371/journal.pone.0131595
143 Di Cairano E.S. Davalli A.M. Perego L. Sala S. Sacchi V.F. La Rosa S. The glial glutamate transporter 1 (GLT1) is expressed by pancreatic beta-cells and prevents glutamate-induced beta-cell death J. Biol. Chem. 286 16 2011 14007 14018 10.1074/jbc.M110.183517 21335552
144 Heymsfield S.B. Avena N.M. Baier L. Brantley P. Bray G.A. Burnett L.C. Hyperphagia: current concepts and future directions proceedings of the 2nd international conference on hyperphagia Obesity (Silver Spring) 22 Suppl 1(01) 2014 S1 S17 10.1002/oby.20646
145 Dawson R. Pelleymounter M.A. Millard W.J. Liu S. Eppler B. Attenuation of leptin-mediated effects by monosodium glutamate-induced arcuate nucleus damage Am. J. Physiol. 273 1 Pt 1 1997 E202 E206 10.1152/ajpendo.1997.273.1.E202 9252497
146 Willers S.M. Brunekreef B. Abrahamse-Berkeveld M. van de Heijning B. van der Beek E. Serum visfatin and leptin in relation to childhood adiposity and body fat distribution: the PIAMA birth cohort study Ann. Nutr. Metab. 66 2–3 2015 63 71 10.1159/000369979 25612646
147 Zanfirescu A. Cristea A.N. Nitulescu G.M. Velescu B.S. Gradinaru D. Chronic monosodium glutamate administration induced hyperalgesia in mice Nutrients 10 1 2017 1 10.3390/nu10010001
148 Schaumburg H.H. Byck R. Gerstl R. Mashman J.H. Monosodium L-glutamate: Its pharmacology and role in the Chinese restaurantsyndrome Science 163 3869 1969 826 828 10.1126/science.163.3869.826 5764480
149 Kim K. Influences of environmental chemicals on atopic dermatitis Toxicol. Res. 31 2 2015 89 96 10.5487/TR.2015.31.2.089 26191377
150 Overgaard L.E.K. Main K.M. Frederiksen H. Stender S. Szecsi P.B. Williams H.C. Thyssen J.P. Children with atopic dermatitis and frequent emollient use have increased urinary levels of low-molecular-weight phthalate metabolites and parabens Allergy 72 11 2017 1768 1777 10.1111/all.13157 28281298
151 Calle E.E. Kaaks R. Overweight, obesity and cancer: epidemiological evidence and proposed mechanisms Nat. Rev. Cancer 4 8 2004 579 591 10.1038/nrc1408 15286738
152 Bendsen N.T. Christensen R. Bartels E.M. Astrup A. Consumption of industrial and ruminant trans fatty acids and risk of coronary heart disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 65 7 2011 773 783 10.1038/ejcn.2011.34 21427742
153 Te Morenga L. Montez J.M. Health effects of saturated and trans-fatty acid intake in children and adolescents: systematic review and meta-analysis PLoS One 12 11 2017 e0186672 10.1371/journal.pone.0186672
154 Mansoor N. Vinknes K.J. Veierød M.B. Retterstøl K. Low-carbohydrate diets increase LDL-cholesterol, and thereby indicate increased risk of CVD Br. J. Nutr. 115 12 2016 2264 2266 10.1017/S0007114516001343 27376624
155 Valsdottir T.D. Henriksen C. Odden N. Nellemann B. Jeppesen P.B. Hisdal J. Effect of a low-carbohydrate high-fat diet and a single bout of exercise on glucose tolerance, lipid profile and endothelial function in normal weight young healthy females Front. Physiol. 10 2019 1499 10.3389/fphys.2019.01499 31920704
156 Chiu S. Williams P.T. Krauss R.M. Effects of a very high saturated fat diet on LDL particles in adults with atherogenic dyslipidemia: a randomized controlled trial PLoS One 12 2 2017 e0170664 10.1371/journal.pone.0170664
157 Dreon D.M. Fernstrom H.A. Campos H. Blanche P. Williams P.T. Krauss R.M. Change in dietary saturated fat intake is correlated with change in mass of large low-density-lipoprotein particles in men Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 67 5 1998 828 836 10.1093/ajcn/67.5.828 9583838
158 Krauss R.M. Blanche P.J. Rawlings R.S. Fernstrom H.S. Williams P.T. Separate effects of reduced carbohydrate intake and weight loss on atherogenic dyslipidemia Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 83 5 2006 1025 1031 10.1093/ajcn/83.5.1025 16685042
159 Krauss R.M. Dietary and genetic probes of atherogenic dyslipidemia Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 25 11 2005 2265 2272 10.1161/01.ATV.0000186365.73973.f0 16166563
160 Santos-Marcos J.A. Perez-Jimenez F. Camargo A. The role of diet and intestinal microbiota in the development of metabolic syndrome J. Nutr. Biochem. 70 2019 1 27 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2019.03.017 31082615
161 Duan Y. Zeng L. Zheng C. Song B. Li F. Kong X. Xu K. Inflammatory linksbetweenhighfatdiets and diseases Front. Immunol. 9 2018 2649 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02649 30483273
162 Kothari V. Luo Y. Tornabene T. O’Neill A.M. Greene M.W. Geetha T. Babu J.R. High fat diet induces brain insulin resistance and cognitive impairment in mice Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. Molecular Basis of Disease 1863 2 2017 499 508 10.1016/j.bbadis.2016.10.006 27771511
163 Bruce-Keller A.J.B. Salbaum J.M. Luo M. Blanchard E. 4nd Taylor C.M. Welsh D.A. Berthoud H.R. Obese-type gut microbiota induce neurobehavioral changes in the absence of obesity Biol. Psychiatry 77 7 2015 607 615 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.07.012 25173628
164 Busquets O. Ettcheto M. Pallàs M. Beas-Zarate C.B. Verdaguer E. Auladell C. Long-term exposition to a high fat diet favors the appearance of beta-amyloid depositions in the brain of C57BL/6J mice. A potential model of sporadic Alzheimer’s disease Mech. Ageing Dev. 162 2017 38 45 10.1016/j.mad.2016.11.002 27863851
165 Lin B. Hasegawa Y. Takane K. Koibuchi N. Cao C. Kim-Mitsuyama S.K. High-fat-diet intake enhances cerebral amyloid angiopathy and cognitive impairment in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, independently of metabolic disorders J. Am. Heart Assoc. 5 6 2016 e003154 10.1161/JAHA.115.003154
166 Petrov D. Pedros I. Artiach G. Sureda F.X. Barroso E. Pallas M. High-fat diet-induced deregulation of hippocampal insulin signaling and mitochondrial homeostasis deficiences contribute to Alzheimer disease pathology in rodents Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1852 2015 1687 1699 10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.05.004 26003667
167 Guillemot-Legris O.G. Masquelier J. Everard A. Cani P.D. Alhouayek M. Muccioli G.G. High-fat diet feeding differentially affects the development of inflammation in the central nervous system J. Neuroinflammation 13 1 2016 206 10.1186/s12974-016-0666-8 27566530
168 Turnbaugh P.J. Hamady M. Yatsunenko T. Cantarel B.L. Duncan A. Ley R.E. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins Nature 457 7228 2009 480 484 10.1038/nature07540 19043404
169 Le Chatelier E. Nielsen T. Qin J. Prifti E. Hildebrand F. Richness of human gut microbiome correlates with metabolic markers Nature 500 7464 2013 541 546 10.1038/nature12506 23985870
170 Tsukumo D.M. Carvalho B.M. Carvalho Filho M.A.C. Saad M.J. Translational research into gut microbiota: new horizons on obesity treatment: updated 2014 Arch. Endocrinol. Metab. 59 2 2015 154 160 10.1590/2359-3997000000029 25993679
171 Zhang X. Zhang G. Zhang H. Karin M. Bai H. Cai D. Hypothalamic IKK beta/NF-kappaB and ER stress link overnutrition to energy imbalance and obesity Cell 135 1 2008 61 73 10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.043 18854155
172 De Souza C.T. Araujo E.P. Bordin S. Ashimine R. Zollner R.L. Boschero A.C. Consumption of a fat-rich diet activates a proinflammatory response and induces insulin resistance in the hypothalamus Endocrinology 146 10 2005 4192 4199 10.1210/en.2004-1520 16002529
173 Cai D. Liu T. Hypothalamic inflammation: a double-edged sword to nutritional diseases Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1243 2011 E1 E39 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06388.x 22417140
174 Lumeng C.N. Saltiel A.R. Inflammatory links between obesity and metabolic disease J. Clin. Invest. 121 6 2011 2111 2117 10.1172/JCI57132 21633179
175 Nishimura S. Manabe I. Nagasaki M. Eto K. Yamashita H. Ohsugi M. CD8+ effector T cells contribute to macrophage recruitment and adipose tissue inflammation in obesity Nat. Med. 15 8 2009 914 920 10.1038/nm.1964 19633658
176 Bai Y. Sun Q. Macrophage recruitment in obese adipose tissue Obes. Rev. 16 2 2015 127 136 10.1111/obr.12242
177 Bhattacharjee J. Kirby M. Softic S. Miles L. Salazar-Gonzalez R.M.S. Shivakumar P. Kohli R. Hepatic natural killer T-cell and CD8+T-cell signatures in mice with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis Hepatol. Commun. 1 4 2017 299 310 10.1002/hep4.1041 29152605
178 Yao K. Duan Y. Li F. Tan B. Hou Y. Wu G. Yin Y. Leucine in obesity: therapeutic prospects Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 37 8 2016 714 727 10.1016/j.tips.2016.05.004 27256112
179 Lee Y.S. Li P. Huh J.Y. Hwang I.J. Lu M. Kim J.I. Inflammation is necessary for long-term but not short-term high-fat diet-induced insulin resistance Diabetes 60 10 2011 2474 2483 10.2337/db11-0194 21911747
180 Wu Y. Wu T. Wu J. Zhao L. Li Q. Varghese Z. Chronic inflammation exacerbates glucose metabolismdisorders in C57BL/6J mice fed with high-fat diet J. Endocrinol. 219 3 2013 195 204 10.1530/JOE-13-0160 24029730
181 Ellenbroek J.H. Töns H.A. de Graaf N. Loomans C.J. Engelse M.A. Vrolijk H. Topologically heterogeneous beta cell adaptation in response to high-fat diet in mice PLoS One 8 2 2013 e56922 10.1371/journal.pone.0056922
182 Lee B.C. Lee J. Cellular and molecular players in adipose tissue inflammation in the development of obesity-induced insulin resistance Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1842 3 2014 446 462 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.05.017 23707515
183 Heydemann A. An overview of murine high fat diet as a model for type 2 diabetes mellitus J. Diabetes Res. 2016 2016 2902351 10.1155/2016/2902351
184 Tersey S.A. Maier B. Nishiki Y. Maganti A.V. Nadler J.L. Mirmira R.G. 12-lipoxygenase promotes obesity-induced oxidative stress in pancreatic islets Mol. Cell. Biol. 34 19 2014 3735 3745 10.1128/MCB.00157-14 25071151
185 Fang Y.L. Chen H. Wang C.L. Liang L. Pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in children and adolescence: from “two hit theory” to “multiple hit model” World J. Gastroenterol. 24 27 2018 2974 2983 10.3748/wjg.v24.i27.2974 30038464
186 Csóka B. Töro G. Vindeirinho J. Varga Z.V. Koscsó B. Németh Z.H. A2A adenosine receptors control pancreatic dysfunction in high-fat-diet-induced obesity Faseb J. 31 11 2017 4985 4997 10.1096/fj.201700398R 28765173
187 Yoneda M. Mawatari H. Fujita K. Iida H. Yonemitsu K. Kato S. High-sensitivity C-reactive protein is an independent clinical feature of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and also of the severity of fibrosis in NASH J. Gastroenterol. 42 7 2007 573 582 10.1007/s00535-007-2060-x 17653654
188 Song L. Qu D. Zhang Q. Jiang J. Zhou H. Jiang R. Phytosterol esters attenuate hepatic steatosis in rats with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease rats fed a high-fat diet 41604. [published correction appears in Scientific Reports 2017 Aug 24; 7:46884] Sci. Rep. 7 2017 41604 10.1038/srep41604 28169366
189 Yasutake K. Nakamuta M. Shima Y. Ohyama A. Masuda K. Haruta N. Nutritional investigation of non-obese patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: the significance of dietary cholesterol Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 44 4 2009 471 477 10.1080/00365520802588133 19058085
190 Xiao X. Wiersch J. El-Gohary Y. Guo P. Prasadan K. Paredes J. TGFβ receptor signaling is essential for inflammation-induced but not β-cell workload-induced β-cell proliferation Diabetes 62 4 2013 1217 1226 10.2337/db12-1428 23248173
191 Gressner A.M. Weiskirchen R. Breitkopf K. Dooley S. Roles of TGF-beta in hepatic fibrosis Front. Bioscie. A J. Virtual Library 7 2002 d793 d807
192 Souza-Mello V.S. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors as targets to treat non-alcoholic fatty liver disease World J. Hepatol. 7 8 2015 1012 1019 10.4254/wjh.v7.i8.1012 26052390
193 Aghajani M. Imani A. Faghihi M. Mahdavi M.R.V. Mahboubi S. Moradi F. Moghaddam E.K. Does increased nitric oxide production and oxidative stress due to high fat diet affect cardiac function after myocardial infarction? Journal of Cellular and Molecular Anesthesia 2 2017 3 8 10.22037/jcma.v2i1.14288
194 Mauro C. Smith J. Cucchi D. Coe D. Fu H. Bonacina F. Obesity-induced metabolic stress leads to biased effector memory CD4+ T cell differentiation via PI3K p110delta-Akt-mediated signals Cell Metab. 25 3 2017 593 609 10.1016/j.cmet.2017.01.008 28190771
195 Dunn S.M. Hilgers R.H.P. Das K.C. Endothelial dysfunction and outward remodeling in coronary and mesenteric arteries in response to high fat diet in mice Faseb J. 30 2016 1282 1286 10.1096/fasebj.30.1_supplement.1282.6
196 Martins M.A. Catta-Preta M. Mandarim-de-Lacerda C.A. Aguila M.B. Brunini T.C. Mendes-Ribeiro A.C. High fat diets modulate nitric oxide biosynthesis and antioxidant defence in red blood cells fromC57BL/6 mice Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 499 1–2 2010 56 61 10.1016/j.abb.2010.04.025 20450877
197 Unruh D. Srinivasan R. Benson T. Haigh S. Coyle D. Batra N. Red blood cell dysfunction induced by high-fat diet: potential implications for obesity-related atherosclerosis Circulation 132 20 2015 1898 1908 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.017313 26467254
198 Hou J.K. Abraham B. El-Serag H. Dietary intake and risk of developing inflammatory bowel disease: a systematic review of the literature AmericanJournal of Gastroenterology 106 4 2011 563 573 10.1038/ajg.2011.44
199 Fysekidis M. Bouchoucha M. Bihan H. Reach G. Benamouzig R. Catheline J.M. Prevalence and co-occurrence of upper and lower functional gastrointestinal symptoms in patients eligible for bariatric surgery Obes. Surg. 22 3 2012 403 410 10.1007/s11695-011-0396-z 21503810
200 Tomas J. Mulet C. Saffarian A. Cavin J.B. Ducroc R. Regnault B. High-fat diet modifies the PPAR-γ pathway leading to disruption of microbial and physiological ecosystem in murine small intestine Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113 40 2016 E5934 E5943 10.1073/pnas.1612559113 27638207
201 Agus A. Denizot J. Thévenot J. Martinez-Medina M. Massier S. Western diet induces a shift in microbiota composition enhancing susceptibility to Adherent-Invasive E. Coli infection and intestinal inflammation Sci. Rep. 6 2016 19032 10.1038/srep19032 26742586
202 Lin J. Judd S. Le A. Ard J. Newsome B.B. Howard G. Associations of dietary fat with albuminuria and kidney dysfunction Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 92 4 2010 897 904 10.3945/ajcn.2010.29479 20702608
203 Ebenezer P.J. Mariappan N. Elks C.M. Haque M. Francis J. Diet-induced renal changes in Zucker rats are ameliorated by the superoxide dismutase mimetic TEMPOL Obesity 17 11 2009 1994 2002 10.1038/oby.2009.137 19424163
204 Elmarakby A.A. Imig J.D. Obesity is the major contributor to vascular dysfunction and inflammation in high-fat diet hypertensive rats Clin. Sci. 118 4 2010 291 301 10.1042/CS20090395
205 Jiang T. Wang Z. Proctor G. Moskowitz S. Liebman S.E. Rogers T. Diet-induced obesity in C57BL/6J mice causes increased renal lipid accumulation and glomerulosclerosis via a sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c-dependent pathway J. Biol. Chem. 280 37 2005 32317 32325 10.1074/jbc.M500801200 16046411
206 Wang X.X. Jiang T. Shen Y. Adorini L. Pruzanski M. Gonzalez F.J. The farnesoid X receptor modulates renal lipid metabolism and diet-induced renal inflammation, fibrosis, and proteinuria American Journal of Physiology-Renal Physiology 297 2009 F1587 F1596 10.1152/ajprenal.00404.2009 19776172
207 Corwin R.L. Hartman T.J. Maczuga S.A. Graubard B.I. Dietary saturated fat intake is inversely associated with bone density in humans: analysis of NHANES III J. Nutr. 136 1 2006 159 165 10.1093/jn/136.1.159 16365076
208 Zhao L.J. Liu Y.J. Liu P.Y. Hamilton J. Recker R.R. Deng H.W. Relationship of obesity with osteoporosis J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 92 5 2007 1640 1646 10.1210/jc.2006-0572 17299077
209 Shapses S.A. Sukumar D. Bone metabolism in obesity and weight loss Annu. Rev. Nutr. 32 2012 287 309 10.1146/annurev.nutr.012809.104655 22809104
210 Xiao Y. Cui J. Li Y.X. Shi Y.H. Wang B. Le G.W. Wang Z.P. Dyslipidemic high-fat diet affects adversely bone metabolism in mice associated with impaired antioxidant capacity Nutrition 27 2 2011 214 220 10.1016/j.nut.2009.11.012 20392601
211 Cao J.J. Gregoire B.R. Gao H. High-fat diet decreases cancellous bone mass but has no effect on cortical bone mass in the tibia in mice Bone 44 6 2009 1097 1104 10.1016/j.bone.2009.02.017 19264159
212 Reid I.R. Fat and bone Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 503 1 2010 20 27 10.1016/j.abb.2010.06.027 20599663
213 Lecka-Czernik B.L. Stechschulte L.A. Czernik P.J. Dowling A.R. High bone mass in adult mice with diet-induced obesity results from a combination of initial increase in bone mass followed by attenuation in bone formation; implications for high bone mass and decreased bone quality in obesity Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 410 2015 35 41 10.1016/j.mce.2015.01.001 25576855
214 Tian L. Wang C. Xie Y. Wan S. Zhang K. Yu X. High fructose and high fat exert different effects on changes in trabecular bone micro-structure J. Nutr. Health Aging 22 3 2018 361 370 10.1007/s12603-017-0933-0 29484349
215 Chen G.L. Luo Y. Eriksson D. Meng X. Qian C. Bäuerle T. High fat diet increases melanoma cell growth in the bone marrow by inducing osteopontin and interleukin 6 Oncotarget 7 18 2016 26653 26669 10.18632/oncotarget.8474 27049717
216 Upadhyay J. Farr O.M. Mantzoros C.S. The role of leptin in regulating bone metabolism Metab. Clin. Exp. 64 1 2015 105 113 10.1016/j.metabol.2014.10.021 25497343
217 Wolf M.J. Adili A. Piotrowitz K. Abdullah Z. Boege Y. Stemmer K. Metabolic activation of intrahepatic CD8+ T cells and NKT cells causes nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and liver cancer via cross-talk with hepatocytes Cancer Cell 26 4 2014 549 564 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.09.003 25314080
218 Wolfson B. Zhang Y. Gernapudi R. Duru N. Yao Y. Lo P.K. Zhou Q. A High-fat diet promotes mammary gland myofibroblast differentiation through microRNA 140 downregulation Mol. Cell. Biol. 37 4 2017 e00461 00416 10.1128/MCB.00461-16 27895151
219 Arita S. Kinoshita Y. Ushida K. Enomoto A. Inagaki-Ohara K.I. High-fat diet feeding promotes stemness and precancerous changes in murine gastric mucosa mediated by leptin receptor signaling pathway Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 610 2016 16 24 10.1016/j.abb.2016.09.015 27693038
220 Beyaz S. Mana M.D. Roper J. Kedrin D. Saadatpour A. High-fat diet enhances stemness and tumorigenicity of intestinal progenitors Nature 531 7592 2016 53 58 10.1038/nature17173 26935695
221 Dermadi D. Valo S. Ollila S. Soliymani R. Sipari N. Pussila M. Western diet deregulates bile acid homeostasis, cell proliferation and tumorigenesis in colon Cancer Res. 77 12 2017 3352 3363 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2860 28416481
222 Baltgalvis K.A. Berger F.G. Peña M.M. Davis J.M. Carson J.A. The interaction of a high-fat diet and regular moderate intensity exercise on intestinal polyp development in Apc(Min/+) mice Cancer Prev. Res. 2 7 2009 641 649 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-09-0017
223 Wang D. Fu L. Ning W. Guo L. Sun X. Dey S.K. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta promotes colonic inflammation and tumor growth Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences of the United States of America 111 19 2014 7084 7089 10.1073/pnas.1324233111
224 Zuo X. Peng Z. Moussalli M.J. Morris J.S. Broaddus R.R. Fischer S.M. Shureiqi I. Targeted genetic disruption of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-delta and colonic tumorigenesis J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 101 10 2009 762 767 10.1093/jnci/djp078 19436036
225 Nadella S. Burks J. Al-Sabban A. Inyang G. Wang J. Tucker R.D. Dietary fat stimulates pancreatic cancer growth and promotes fibrosis of the tumor microenvironment through the cholecystokinin receptor Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 315 5 2018 G699 G712 10.1152/ajpgi.00123.2018 29927319
226 Chang H.H. Moro A. Takakura K. Su H.Y. Mo A. Nakanishi M. Incidence of pancreatic cancer is dramatically increased by a high fat, high calorie diet in KrasG12D mice PLoS One 12 9 2017 e0184455 10.1371/journal.pone.0184455
227 Philip B. Roland C.L. Daniluk J. Liu Y. Chatterjee D. Gomez S.B. A high-fat diet activates oncogenic Kras and COX2 to induce development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in mice Gastroenterology 145 6 2013 1449 1458 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.08.018 23958541
228 Khasawneh J. Schulz M.D. Walch A. Rozman J. Hrabe de Angelis M.H. Klingenspor M. Inflammation and mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation link obesity to early tumor promotion Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106 9 2009 3354 3359 10.1073/pnas.0802864106 19208810
229 Rozengurt E. Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR): a point of convergence in the action of insulin/IGF-1 and G protein-coupled receptor agonists in pancreatic cancer cells Front. Physiol. 5 2014 357 10.3389/fphys.2014.00357 25295009
230 Rossi J.F. Lu Z.Y. Jourdan M. Klein B. Interleukin-6 as a therapeutic target Clin. Cancer Res. 21 6 2015 1248 1257 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2291 25589616
231 Hayashi T. Fujita K. Nojima S. Hayashi Y. Nakano K. Ishizuya Y. High-fat diet-induced inflammation accelerates prostate cancer growth via IL6 signaling Clin. Cancer Res. 24 17 2018 4309 4318 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-0106 29776955
232 Narita S. Tsuchiya N. Saito M. Inoue T. Kumazawa T. Yuasa T. Candidate genes involved in enhanced growth of human prostate cancer under high fat feeding identified by microarray analysis Prostate 68 3 2008 321 335 10.1002/pros.20681 18175332
233 Poloz Y. Stambolic V. Obesity and cancer, a case for insulin signaling Cell Death Dis. 6 2015 e2037 10.1038/cddis.2015.381 26720346
234 Narita S. Nara T. Sato H. Koizumi A. Huang M. Inoue T. Habuchi T. Research evidence on high-fat diet-induced prostate cancer development and progression J. Clin. Med. 8 5 2019 597 10.3390/jcm8050597
235 Xu H. Jiang H.W. Ding Q. Insulin-like growth factor 1 related pathways and high-fat diet promotion of transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate (TRAMP) cancer progression Actas Urologicas Españolas 39 3 2015 161 168 10.1016/j.acuro.2014.05.014 25442907
236 Masko E.M. Thomas J.A. 2nd Antonelli J.A. Lloyd J.C. Phillips T.E. Poulton S.H. Low-carbohydrate diets and prostate cancer: How low is “low enough”? Cancer Prev. Res. 3 9 2010 1124 1131 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0071
237 Mavropoulos J.C. Buschemeyer W.C. 3rd Tewari A.K. Rokhfeld D. Pollak M. Zhao Y. The effects of varying dietary carbohydrate and fat content on survival in a murine LNCaP prostate cancer xenograft model Cancer Prev. Res. 2 6 2009 557 565 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-08-0188
238 Lin J. Yang R. Tarr P.T. Wu P.H. Handschin C. Li S. Hyperlipidemic effects of dietary saturated fats mediated through PGC-1beta coactivation of SREBP Cell 120 2 2005 261 273 10.1016/j.cell.2004.11.043 15680331
239 Lumeng C.N. Deyoung S.M. Bodzin J.L. Saltiel A.R. Increased inflammatory properties of adipose tissue macrophages recruited during diet-induced obesity Diabetes 56 1 2007 16 23 10.2337/db06-1076 17192460
240 Cho H.J. Kwon G.T. Park H. Song H. Lee K.W. Kim J.I. Park J.H.Y. A high-fat diet containing lard accelerates prostate cancer progression and reduces survival rate in mice: possible contribution of adipose tissue-derived cytokines Nutrients 7 4 2015 2539 2561 10.3390/nu7042539 25912035
241 Huang M. Narita S. Numakura K. Tsuruta H. Saito M. Inoue T. A high-fat diet enhances proliferation of prostate cancer cells and activates MCP-1/CCR2 signaling Prostate 72 16 2012 1779 1788 10.1002/pros.22531 22514016
242 Allott E.H. Masko E.M. Freedland S.J. Obesity and prostate cancer: weighing the evidence Eur. Urol. 63 5 2013 800 809 10.1016/j.eururo.2012.11.013 23219374
243 Venkateswaran V. Klotz L.H. Diet and prostate cancer: mechanisms of action and implications for chemoprevention Nat. Rev. Urol. 7 8 2010 442 453 10.1038/nrurol.2010.102 20647991
244 Gimble J.M. Guilak F. Nuttall M.E. Sathishkumar S. Vidal M. Bunnell B.A. In vitro differentiation potential of mesenchymal stem cells Transfus. Med. Hemotherapy 35 3 2008 228 238 10.1159/000124281
245 Fletcher S.J. Sacca P.A. Pistone-Creydt M. Coló F.A. Serra M.F. Human breast adipose tissue: characterization of factors that change during tumor progression in human breast cancer J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 36 1 2017 26 10.1186/s13046-017-0494-4 28173833
246 Seo B.R. Bhardwaj P. Choi S. Gonzalez J. Andresen Eguiluz R.C.A. Wang K. Obesity-dependent changes in interstitial ECM mechanics promote breast tumorigenesis Sci. Transl. Med. 7 301 2015 301ra130 10.1126/scitranslmed.3010467
247 Schulz M.D. Atay C. Heringer J. Romrig F.K. Schwitalla S. Aydin B. High-fat-diet-mediated dysbiosis promotes intestinal carcinogenesis independently of obesity Nature 514 7523 2014 508 512 10.1038/nature13398 25174708
248 Alemán J.O. Eusebi L.H. Ricciardiello L. Patidar K. Sanyal A.J. Holt P.R. Mechanisms of obesity-induced gastrointestinal neoplasia Gastroenterology 146 2 2014 357 373 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.11.051 24315827
249 Roberts D.L. Dive C. Renehan A.G. Biological mechanisms linking obesity and cancer risk: new perspectives Annu. Rev. Med. 61 2010 301 316 10.1146/annurev.med.080708.082713 19824817
250 Dawson D.W. Hertzer K. Moro A. Donald G. Chang H.H. Go V.L. High-fat, high-calorie diet promotes early pancreatic neoplasia in the conditional KrasG12D mouse model Cancer Prev. Res. 6 10 2013 1064 1073 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0065
251 Zyromski N.J. Mathur A. Pitt H.A. Wade T.E. Wang S. Nakshatri P. Obesity potentiates the growth and dissemination of pancreatic cancer Surgery 146 2 2009 258 263 10.1016/j.surg.2009.02.024 19628082
252 McAndrews K.M. Yi J. McGrail D.J. Dawson M.R. Enhanced adhesion of stromal cells to invasive cancer cells regulated by cadherin 11 ACS Chem. Biol. 10 8 2015 1932 1938 10.1021/acschembio.5b00353 26046821
253 Langhe R.P. Gudzenko T. Bachmann M. Becker S.F. Gonnermann C. Winter C. Cadherin-11 localizes to focal adhesions and promotes cell-substrate adhesion Nat. Commun. 7 2016 10909 10.1038/ncomms10909 26952325
254 Nezis I.P. Stenmark H. p62 at the interface of autophagy, oxidative stress signaling, and cancer Antioxid. Redox Signal. 17 5 2012 786 793 10.1089/ars.2011.4394 22074114
255 Mohamed A. Ayman A. Deniece J. Wang T. Kovach C. Siddiqui M.T. Cohen C. P62/Ubiquitin IHC expression correlated with clinicopathologic parameters and outcome in gastrointestinal carcinomas Front. Oncol. 5 2015 70 10.3389/fonc.2015.00070 25870850
256 Ling J. Kang Y. Zhao R. Xia Q. Lee D.F. Chang Z. 12D-induced IKK2/beta/NF-kappaB activation by IL-1alpha and p62 feed forward loops is required for development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma Cancer Cell 21 2012 105 120 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.12.006 22264792
257 Zhao Y. Wu T. Shao S. Shi B. Zhao Y. Phenotype, development, and biological function of myeloid-derived suppressor cells Oncoimmunology 5 2 2016 e1004983 10.1080/2162402X.2015.1004983
258 Bouchery T. Kyle R. Camberis M. Shepherd A. Filbey K. ILC2s and T cells cooperate to ensure maintenance of M2 macrophages for lung immunity against hookworms Nat. Commun. 6 2015 6970 10.1038/ncomms7970 25912172
259 Ostrand-Rosenberg S.O. Sinha P. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells: linking inflammation and cancer J. Immunol. 182 8 2009 4499 4506 10.4049/jimmunol.0802740 19342621
260 Tamura K. Makino A. Hullin-Matsuda F.H. Kobayashi T. Furihata M. Chung S. Novel lipogenic enzyme ELOVL7 is involved in prostate cancer growth through saturated long-chain fatty acid metabolism Cancer Res. 69 20 2009 8133 8140 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0775 19826053
261 Huang M. Koizumi A. Narita S. Inoue T. Tsuchiya N. Nakanishi H. Diet-induced alteration of fatty acid synthase in prostate cancer progression Oncogenesis 5 2016 e195 10.1038/oncsis.2015.42 26878389
262 Huang M. Narita S. Inoue T. Tsuchiya N. Satoh S. Nanjo H. Diet-induced macrophage inhibitory cytokine 1 promotes prostate cancer progression Endocr. Relat. Cancer 21 1 2014 39 50 10.1530/ERC-13-0227 24344250
263 Di Zazzo E. Polito R. Bartollino S. Nigro E. Porcile C. Bianco A. Adiponectin as linkfactor between adipose tissue and cancer Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20 4 2019 839 10.3390/ijms20040839
264 Di Zazzo E. Galasso G. Giovannelli P. Di Donato M. Castoria G. Estrogens and theirreceptors in prostatecancer: therapeutic implications Front. Oncol. 8 2018 2 10.3389/fonc.2018.00002 29404276
265 Allott E.H. Masko E.M. Freedland A.R. Macias E. Pelton K. Solomon K.R. Serum cholesterol levels and tumor growth in a PTEN-null transgenic mouse model of prostate cancer Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 21 2 2018 196 203 10.1038/s41391-018-0045-x 29795142
266 Massillo C. Dalton G.N. Porretti J. Scalise G.D. Farre P.L. Piccioni F. CTBP1/CYP19A1/estradiol axis together with adipose tissue impacts over prostate cancer growth associated to metabolic syndrome Int. J. Cancer 144 2019 1115 1127 10.1002/ijc.31773 30152543
267 Moiola C.P. De Luca P. Zalazar F. Cotignola J. Rodríguez-Seguí S.A. Prostate tumor growth is impaired by CtBP1 depletion in high-fat diet-fed mice Clin. Cancer Res. 20 15 2014 4086 4095 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0322 24842953
268 Migliaccio V. Scudiero R. Sica R. Lionetti L. Putti R. Oxidative stress and mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2 expression in hepatic steatosis induced by exposure to xenobiotic DDE and high fat diet in male Wistar rats PLoS One 14 4 2019 e0215955 10.1371/journal.pone.0215955
269 Chijioke C.P. Chijioke U.O. Okolo T. Personalized diet for psoriasis: side benefit on blood pressure and metabolic parameters J. Hypertens. 30 2012 158
270 Chijioke C.P. Chijioke U.O. Okolo T. Ekwe E. Nutritoxigenetics of psoriasis: a ten year online case diary of dietary challenge and avoidance effects on chronic disease phenotype Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 115 2014 361
271 Chijioke C.P. Chijioke U.O. Okolo T. Ekwe E. Onwasigwe C. Case study of essential hypertension: efficacy of an antipsoriatic dietary approach J. Hypertens. 32 2014 660
272 Chijioke C. Chijioke O. Okolo T. Ekwe E. Nubila I. Onwasigwe C. Nutritoxigenetics of hypertension: efficacy of a personalized categorical food avoidance dietary approach Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 115 2014 361
273 Pedram P. Wadden D. Amini P. Gulliver W. Randell E. Cahill F. Food addiction: its prevalence and significant association with obesity in the general population PLoS One 8 9 2013 e74832 10.1371/journal.pone.0074832
274 Ayaz A. Nergiz-Unal R.N. Dedebayraktar D. Akyol A. Pekcan A.G. Besler H.T. Buyuktuncer Z. How does food addiction influence dietary intake profile? PLoS One 13 4 2018 e0195541 10.1371/journal.pone.0195541
275 Pedram P. Sun G. Hormonal and dietary characteristics in obese human subjects with and without food addiction Nutrients 7 1 2014 223 238 10.3390/nu7010223 25558907
276 Pursey K.M. Stanwell P. Gearhardt A.N. Collins C.E. Burrows T.L. The prevalence of food addiction as assessed by the Yale Food Addiction Scale: a systematic review Nutrients 6 10 2014 4552 4590 10.3390/nu6104552 25338274
277 Obregón A. Fuentes J. Pettinelli P. Association between food addiction and nutritional status in Chilean college students Rev. Mã©dica Chile 143 5 2015 589 597 10.4067/S0034-98872015000500006
278 Asghari G. Yuzbashian E. Mirmiran P. Mahmoodi B. Azizi F. Fast-food intake increases the incidence of metabolic syndrome in children and adolescents: tehran lipid and glucosestudy PLoS One 10 10 2015 e0139641 10.1371/journal.pone.0139641
279 Afkhami-Ardekani M. Zahedi-Asl S. Rashidi M. Atifah M. Hosseinpanah F. Azizi F. Incidence and trend of a metabolic syndrome phenotype among Tehranian adolescents: findings from the Tehran Lipid and glucose Study, 1998–2001 to 2003–2006 Diabetes Care 33 9 2010 2110 2112 10.2337/dc09-0023 20519656
280 Tavares L.F. Fonseca S.C. Garcia Rosa M.L.G. Yokoo E.M. Relationship between ultra-processed foods and metabolic syndrome in adolescents from a Brazilian Family Doctor Program Public Health Nutr. 15 1 2012 82 87 10.1017/S1368980011001571 21752314
281 Kelishadi R. Pour M.H. Sarraf-Zadegan N.S. Sadry G.H. Ansari R. Alikhassy H. Bashardoust N. Obesity and associated modifiable environmental factors in Iranian adolescents: isfahan Healthy Heart Program—heart health promotion from childhood Pediatr. Int. 45 4 2003 435 442 10.1046/j.1442-200x.2003.01738.x 12911481
282 Kelishadi R. Pour M.H. Zadegan N.S. Kahbazi M. Sadry G. Amani A. Dietary fat intake and lipid profiles of Iranian adolescents: isfahan Healthy Heart Program—heart health promotion from childhood Prev. Med. 39 4 2004 760 766 10.1016/j.ypmed.2004.02.047 15351543
283 Bowman S.A. Gortmaker S.L. Ebbeling C.B. Pereira M.A. Ludwig D.S. Effects of fast-food consumption on energy intake and diet quality among children in a national household survey Pediatrics 113 1 Pt 1 2004 112 118 10.1542/peds.113.1.112 14702458
284 Mozaffarian D. Pischon T. Hankinson S.E. Rifai N. Joshipura K. Willett W.C. Rimm E.B. Dietary intake of trans fatty acids and systemic inflammation in women Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 79 4 2004 606 612 10.1093/ajcn/79.4.606 15051604
285 Baer D.J. Judd J.T. Clevidence B.A. Tracy R.P. Dietary fatty acids affect plasma markers of inflammation in healthy men fed controlled diets: a randomized crossover study Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 79 6 2004 969 973 10.1093/ajcn/79.6.969 15159225
286 Purkayastha S. Cai D. Neuroinflammatory basis of metabolic syndrome Mol. Metab. 2 4 2013 356 363 10.1016/j.molmet.2013.09.005 24327952
287 Noel C.A. Cassano P.A. Dando R. College-aged males experience attenuated sweet and salty taste with modest weight gain J. Nutr. 147 10 2017 1885 1891 10.3945/jn.117.255869 28835388
288 Stewart J.E. Keast R.S. Recent fat intake modulates fat taste sensitivity in lean and overweight subjects Int. J. Obes. 36 6 2012 834 842 10.1038/ijo.2011.155
289 Bertino M. Beauchamp G.K. Engelman K. Increasing dietary salt alters salt taste preference Physiol. Behav. 38 2 1986 203 213 10.1016/0031-9384(86)90155-1 3797487
290 Sartor F. Donaldson L.F. Markland D.A. Loveday H. Jackson M.J. Kubis H.P. Taste perception and implicit attitude toward sweet related to body mass index and soft drink supplementation Appetite 57 1 2011 237 246 10.1016/j.appet.2011.05.107 21600942
291 Zhao G.Q. Zhang Y. Hoon M.A. Chandrashekar J. Ryba N.J.P. Zuker C.S. The receptors for mammalian sweet and umami taste Cell 106 2001 381 390 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00844-4 11509186
292 Shahbandi A. Choo E. Dando R. Long-term exposure to taste stimuli up-regulates PLC beta 2 expression in mouse taste buds Chem. Senses 41 2016 80
293 Wang Y. Beydoun M.A. Caballero B. Gary T.L. Lawrence R. Trends and correlates in meat consumption patterns in the US adult population Public Health Nutr. 13 9 2010 1333 1345 10.1017/S1368980010000224 20188005
294 Banerjee A. Mukherjee S. Maji B.K. Manipulation of genes could inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection that causes COVID-19 pandemics Exp. Biol. Med. 2021 10.1177/15353702211008106
295 Mozaffarian D. Dietary and policy priorities for cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and obesity: a comprehensive review Circulation 133 2 2016 187 225 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.018585 26746178
296 WHO Protecting Children From the Harmful Effects of Food and Drink Marketing 2014 World Health Organization (accessed 13 March, 2015) https://www.who.int/features/2014/uk-food-drink-marketing/en/
297 Konrad S.P. Farah V. Rodrigues B. Wichi R.B. Machado U.F. Lopes H.F. D’Agord Schaan B. De Angelis K. Irigoyen M.C. Monosodium Glutamate Neonatal Treatment Induces Cardiovascular Autonomic Function Changes in Rodents Clinics (Sao Paulo) 67 10 2012 1209 1214 23070349
298 Vellisca M.Y. Latorre J.I. Monosodium glutamate and aspartame in perceived pain in fibromyalgia Rheumatology International 34 7 2013 1011 1013 10.1007/s00296-013-2801-5 23765203

