
==== Front
Curr Opin Neurobiol
Curr Opin Neurobiol
Current Opinion in Neurobiology
0959-4388
1873-6882
Current Biology

S0959-4388(21)00078-7
10.1016/j.conb.2021.07.008
Article
Neural circuit function redundancy in brain disorders
Mizusaki Beatriz E.P.
O'Donnell Cian cian.odonnell@bristol.ac.uk
∗
Computational Neuroscience Unit, School of Computer Science, Electrical and Electronic Engineering, and Engineering Mathematics, University of Bristol, BS8 1UB, United Kingdom
∗ Corresponding author: O’Donnell, Cian cian.odonnell@bristol.ac.uk
1 10 2021
10 2021
70 7480
© 2021 The Author(s)
2021
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Redundancy is a ubiquitous property of the nervous system. This means that vastly different configurations of cellular and synaptic components can enable the same neural circuit functions. However, until recently, very little brain disorder research has considered the implications of this characteristic when designing experiments or interpreting data. Here, we first summarise the evidence for redundancy in healthy brains, explaining redundancy and three related sub-concepts: sloppiness, dependencies and multiple solutions. We then lay out key implications for brain disorder research, covering recent examples of redundancy effects in experimental studies on psychiatric disorders. Finally, we give predictions for future experiments based on these concepts.

This review comes from a themed issue on Computational Neuroscience

Edited by Julijana Gjorgjieva and Ila Fiete
==== Body
pmcUbiquity of redundancy in the nervous system

Neural circuits have an astronomically large space of potential configurations of their molecular, cellular and synaptic components. Somehow these components must be arranged to enable the circuit to perform useful computations. The task is made easier by the ubiquitous phenomenon of redundancy, which is the idea that, within this enormous space of all possible cellular component configurations, there exists a large subset that achieves effectively equivalent macroscopic computations [1,2]. The main empirical evidence for redundancy in neural systems comes from a series of classic studies from Eve Marder [1,3] on a small neural circuit from the crab and lobster stomatogastric ganglia (STG). Using computational models, they found that very different arrangements of each STG neuron's ion channels and synaptic conductances could achieve identically sequenced circuit oscillations [4,5]. Accordingly, in experiments, these neurons showed twofold to threefold heterogeneity in cellular properties across animals, despite exhibiting consistent circuit function [6]. Similar redundancy phenomena have also been described in Hodgkin–Huxley models [7], mammalian pyramidal neuron models [8], tadpole neurons [9], rodent neuronal activity in vitro and in vivo [10,11] and human neuroimaging data [12]. Collectively, these studies, plus theoretical arguments [2,13, 14, 15], suggest that redundancy is a universal property of the nervous system.

In addition to the core idea of redundancy, we describe three further sub-concepts: sloppiness, compensation and multiple solutions. Sloppiness is the idea that high-level circuit properties are not equally sensitive to the properties of each of its components. Perturbations to some of these components may result in extreme changes to overall function, whereas others may even vary widely while incurring little effect at the circuit level. Dependence is a developmental phenomenon where multiple circuit parts are co-tuned with each other, with strong dependencies between their effects on overall function. We consider multiple solutions as the observation that the various configurations of cellular components that enable satisfactory circuit-level functions need not be connected with each other: multiple functional islands can co-exist in the parameter space.

Despite the ubiquity of redundancy in the brain, surprisingly little research on brain disorders has considered its implications when designing experiments or interpreting data. In the remainder of this review, we will elaborate these implications and outline how they can be used to guide future brain disorder research.Box 1 Convergence of brain dysfunction at the level of neural circuits

Recent high-powered genetic studies have uncovered myriad mutations that correlate with statistical risk for neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders [16]. For example, ~100 distinct genetic mutations have been found that elevate risk for schizophrenia [17], as well as another ~100 that increase risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) [18], including overlapping risk gene sets across different psychiatric disorders [19,20]. Despite this heterogeneity at the genetic level, patients may present overlapping symptoms at the cognitive level, and so receive the same umbrella diagnoses. This implies that there must be points of phenotypic convergence within the levels of organisation in the nervous system, which span from molecules to cells, circuits, cognition and behaviour. Neural circuits are a promising focus for analysis for two reasons: first, if molecular-, synaptic- or cellular-level alterations in a brain disorder do not lead to alterations in neural circuit function, then they cannot be contributing to cognitive symptoms. Second, because neural circuits are closer to behaviour than cellular components are, circuit-level interventions may have more predictable effects on cognitive symptoms, compared with cellular- or molecular-level interventions. This argues that in a symptom-targeted approach, we should bias our efforts towards understanding, diagnosing and treating brain disorders at the neural circuit level rather than the cellular or molecular level, as is common in drug development today [21, 22, 23, 24].

Alt-text: Box 1

Implications of neural redundancy for brain disorder research

The phenomenon of redundancy and each of its three sub-phenomena (sloppiness, dependencies and multiple solutions) have distinct implications for brain disorders (Figure 1). First, we illustrate the effects of redundancy itself (Figure 1a) through a measure of the performance of a hypothetical circuit's function shown in a contour plot relative to component parameters, θ1 and θ2. Darker shades of pink correspond to better performance of the circuit. Real systems actually contain thousands of key components, so the parameter space would be much higher-dimensional: our two-dimensional plot is an oversimplification to aid visualisation. Because of evolutionary pressure, we can assume measurements from wild-type animals or neurotypical people will be located near the peak (blue circles) [25]. As an example, two different genetic mutations linked to the same brain disorder may lead to changes in both parameters, drifting affected individuals to different points in the parameter space. Although each genetic mutation may shift the mean parameter changes in a different direction away from the neurotypical case, redundant disorders end up on roughly the same contour line with respect to circuit function. This implies that from the circuit point of view, these distinct mutations manifest with the same phenotype, even if their parameters differ.Figure 1 Forms of redundancy. The performance of a hypothetical neural circuit is shown as a contour map in pink as a function of the values of two of its components, θ1 and θ2. Darker hues of pink represent better circuit performance. Symbols show possible measured values of θ1 and θ2 for genetically typical people (blue circles) and two different genetic brain disorders A and B (green squares and diamonds, respectively). Panels A–D show different versions of the contour map illustrating various forms of redundancy: (a) generic redundancy, (b) sloppiness, (c) dependencies and (d) multiple solutions.

Figure 1

Importantly, however, despite their similarity in circuit function, the two clusters of individuals with brain disorders might be differentially susceptible to perturbations. In the example of the crustacean STG, individual animals may have distinctive sensitivities to changes in temperature, pH or neuromodulators [26∗∗, 27, 28, 29∗]. In our example (Figure 1a), we can imagine some environmental effector such as a drug or stressful life event that causes a small increase in θ1, corresponding to a rightward shift in all the data points. For both neurotypical people and those with genetic disorder A, this effect would be benign as it would not cause a change in circuit function. In contrast, the same effector could push those with mutation B into even worse values. Alternatively, a different effector that increased θ2 would not cause a circuit function change in either genetically typical people or those with genetic disorder B, but would have a deleterious effect on those with mutation A. This also illustrates a phenomenon with proposed treatments—they may work to rescue symptoms in one group of patients but not another, even if both groups appear superficially similar. In this sense, redundancy might not only be hiding latent vulnerabilities in the system but also heterogeneities in those vulnerabilities across patient groups.

Second, molecular or cellular alterations observed in tissue from human patients or animal models may not actually be affecting the circuit-level function—they may be benign. The circuit may be robust to changes in these components over some tolerable range. This property is referred to by different names, according to the research field or author. We will refer to it here as sloppiness [30,31]. Within the same schematic as before, sloppiness can be seen on another hypothetical contour plot (Figure 1b). In this case, the circuit function is relatively insensitive to the exact value of one parameter (θ1), so it may vary horizontally in the plot across a large range without causing much change in circuit function. In contrast, small changes to the other parameter (θ2) will induce large changes in circuit function. In this case, θ1 is the sloppy parameter. If we consider a brain disorder where a genetic mutation tends to increase both parameters θ1and θ2 in the brains of affected individuals, the change in θ2 would be the primary driver of dysfunction, although θ1’s value would still be correlated with disease severity. If an experimental scientist measured the value of θ1 in both wild-type and brain disorder animal models, they may see a clear difference in the group mean values of θ1 and a parallel change in circuit function. They may conclude that the changes in θ1 are responsible for the circuit-level deficits and design an intervention to reverse the molecular level change in θ1; however, the treatment would not be successful.

Third, we comment on redundant dependencies: altered components may individually have large effects on circuit function when perturbed genetically or experimentally, but homeostatic processes during development may restore high-level function by compensating with changes in other circuit components. In a simple case, this could be a straight pairing of opposing factors, such as increased expression of sodium channels that depolarise the cell being counteracted by increased expression of potassium channels that hyperpolarize it. However, in intact brains, there are so many nonlinear interactions that the compensatory relationships might not be obvious from raw measurements. In (Figure 1c), we depict this idea with another hypothetical contour map on a two-dimensional parameter space. In this case, proper circuit function requires jointly low or jointly high values of θ1 and θ2 together, so if one parameter is low while the other is high, then circuit function is impaired. A genetic mutation could cause a direct increase in θ1, but be developmentally compensated by a corresponding increase in θ2. In this situation, an experiment may yield clear group-level differences in θ1 between wild-type and brain-disorder animal models, but they may not measure parallel changes in θ2. If a scientist nevertheless found a behavioural phenotype due to unobserved alterations elsewhere in the brain, they might go on to design an intervention to bring the value of θ1 in the animal model back down to wild-type values without altering θ2, which might inadvertently make the circuit function worse, not better.

Last, there may be multiple distinct optima to the circuit design (Figure 1d), appearing as multiple islands. Although it is likely that these peaks may be connected via some paths in the full high–dimensional parameter space of all circuit components [32,33], any experimental measurement of a small subset of parameters or therapeutic intervention may have access to only a low-dimensional subspace, where such local optima are likely to persist. Even though the phenomenon of multiple solutions complicates our attempts to understand how brains work, it could paradoxically end up simplifying our search for brain disorder interventions. It implies that fixing circuit function does not require a direct reversal of the original alteration. Depending on how many solutions exist, it may instead be more practical to find a new configuration that restores the circuit operating mode, rather than trying to undo all the various component changes that have accumulated across development—most of which are in any case likely to be hidden to the experimentalist or clinician. We illustrate the phenomenon of multiple solutions schematically in (Figure 1d). The nearest part of parameter space that rescues circuit function in the brain disorder case is not the same as for the genetically typical case. In addition, the intervention that implements this correction would involve changing only θ2, even though θ1 was the parameter altered by the original genetic mutation. Therefore, the phenomenon of multiple solutions may open up counterintuitive options for therapeutics.

Empirical examples of redundancy in brain disorders

Although few studies have directly explored the consequences of redundancy in brain disorders, many have found evidence for homeostatic compensation where changes in one brain component seemed to be counterbalanced by changes in others, a form of redundancy [34∗, 35∗, 36∗, 37, 38, 39]. There are also evidence for disrupted homeostatic plasticity [40, 41, 42] and proposals for how global brain perturbations could lead to deficits only in select neural circuits [43,44]. However, one recent study by Antoine et al. [45] found explicit evidence for circuit redundancy in mouse models of autism (Figure 2). The authors used patch-clamp electrophysiology to measure excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs from layer 4 onto single-layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons in brain slices of the primary somatosensory cortex from wild-type mice and from four different genetic mouse models of autism. Nominally, their aim was to ask if the ratio of synaptic excitation to inhibition (E/I balance) was altered in the autism mouse models, a common theory for autism [46,47]. Indeed, they found that in each of the four autism models, inhibition was decreased more than excitation, implying an increase in the E/I ratio compared with wild-type mice, but surprisingly, they also found that in each case, the amplitude of postsynaptic potentials (PSPs) and spiking responses to stimulation was unchanged relative to wild-type controls. The authors explained this mismatch via computational modelling, which showed that a range of different synaptic E/I ratios would be consistent with any given PSP amplitude (Figure 2). The contour plot in (Figure 2c) shows the PSP amplitude as a function of excitatory (y-axis) and inhibitory (x-axis) synaptic strengths. The mean wild-type values are marked by the open circle, and the blue curve shows the region in this two-dimensional parameter space where wild-type PSP amplitude is preserved, analogous to the dark pink regions in the plots in (Figure 1). Results from all four autism mouse models sat along the blue curve, with the Cntnap2 KO values shown in (Figure 2c) as the black square. Although the autism-related genetic mutations were causing real shifts in synaptic properties, their net effects were redundant, causing no change in the neuron's response to synaptic stimulation. Overall, the result suggested that the autism field's decade-long search for E/I imbalance may have been misguided because redundancy nullified its apparent effect on circuit function.Figure 2 Redundancy in mouse models of autism. a: Example excitatory (red) and inhibitory (blue) synaptic conductance time series from a basic computational model of pyramidal cell voltage. The top ‘native’ plot shows the case when synaptic conductances are set to the values estimated from layer 4 to layer 2/3 synapses in wild-type mice. In Cntnap2 knockout animals, a model for autism, excitatory and inhibitory synaptic conductances (GE and GI) were decreased to 35% and 15% of wild-type values, respectively, implying an increase in the excitation/inhibition ratio. The middle plot shows traces of both conductances were scaled equally to 35% of wild-type values; the bottom plot shows situation that matches the data, where inhibition is decreased more than excitation. b: Compound postsynaptic potentials (PSPs) corresponding to the three scenarios shown in panel A. Note that the PSP amplitude is decreased relative to the native case if the E-I ratio is kept fixed, whereas the increased E-I ratio keeps the PSP amplitude matched to native. b: The contour map of the peak PSP amplitude as a function of the scaling factor on excitatory and inhibitory synaptic strengths. The open circle is the mean value from wild-type control animals. The red line corresponds to the fixed E-I ratio; the blue line corresponds to the fixed PSP peak. The black square symbol is the mean value of synaptic strengths in Cntnap2 knockout mice, whereas the black circle symbol is where values would lie if the E-I ratio was stable. The figure was adapted with permission from Ref. [45].

Figure 2

Another recent study, by O'Donnell et al. [48], found using a computational model of the same brain region, the mouse L2/3 somatosensory cortex, that circuit-level function shows extreme differences in sensitivity to perturbations in some components over others, corresponding to sloppiness (Figure 1b). In line with previous studies [49], the authors also found that neural correlations were altered in a mouse model of fragile-X syndrome, but this circuit-function–level property did not map neatly onto any one distinct circuit model component, implying both redundancies and dependencies between parameters (as in (Figure 1c). Together, these two examples of redundancy illustrate the crucial importance of considering the functional properties of neural circuits when interpreting the results of experiments measuring circuit component changes in brain disorders.

Conclusion and outlook

In summary, because redundancy appears to be a ubiquitous feature of the nervous system, we argue that it should be highlighted when trying to understand or develop treatments for brain disorders. How should these concepts be applied at a practical level to enhance treatment prospects? One general prescription is to aim to simultaneously measure as many circuit components in the same individual as possible, to discover their joint effects on circuit function. However, given the enormous number of candidate neural components to measure, and the complexity of the mapping between circuit components and circuit function, this is currently a challenge even in animal models of brain disorders, never mind individual human patients. Although recording technologies will undoubtedly improve over time, there are no easy solutions to these immense technical obstacles. A second practical problem is that if interventions to tackle selected circuit-function symptoms are designed based on redundancy principles, they may risk knock-on effects on other aspects of circuit function. In general, these effects may be hard to predict a priori, but nonclinical neurobiology considerations and quantitative computer modelling simulations may be used to pre-screen treatments and narrow the empirical search space. Despite these challenges, we argue that it is better to acknowledge redundancy phenomena early and factor them into our research programmes and experimental designs, rather than running the risk of wasting time, funding and chasing flawed hypotheses that could be later undermined by redundancy.

On a more positive note, we also believe redundancy offers hope because it means that we may not need to classify and measure every last detail of every form of disorder to develop effective treatments for symptoms. It may turn out that there are generic principles of neural circuit dysfunction that allow us to generalise our insights across the ever-growing list of molecularly distinct brain disorders. These principles may in turn allow us to derive rational treatment strategies that enable correction of common, systems-level symptoms, rather than painstakingly attempting to correct each molecular-level perturbation one at a time.

As this is a very general framework, we anticipate that many predictions follow. We end by giving one example prediction for redundancy and each of its three sub-phenomena.• Redundancy itself predicts that the magnitude of the differences in measures of neural circuit components between genotypes is greater than the magnitude of differences of measures of functional activity in the same circuits. However, this superficial similarity may hide heterogeneity in response to perturbations, across groups of related disorders.

• Sloppiness predicts that the degree of within- or across-animal heterogeneity in a circuit component parameter should be inversely proportional to the magnitude of its effect on circuit function. If a particular component shows low heterogeneity across wild-type animals, and it is altered in a brain disorder, then it likely also plays a causal role in any circuit-function–level alterations.

• Dependence predicts that any set of cellular components that strongly co-vary within wild-type animals are unlikely to be causally contributing to circuit-function–level alterations in brain disorders. Reversing the changes of any subset of these components in isolation might even exacerbate circuit-function symptoms.

• Multiple solutions predict that the individual animals from a genetically modified cohort that are most similar to the wild-type animals at the circuit function or behavioural level will not necessarily have the most wild-type–like circuit components.

Box 2 Insights from deep learning

The phenomena of redundancy and multiple optima have also been extensively explored in the field of deep learning and artificial neural networks, where large brain-inspired models are trained to perform computational tasks by iteratively tuning the weights of connections between units, analogous to the synaptic strengths of neural connections in the brain. Deep learning researchers have a key advantage compared with neuroscientists: they can mathematically calculate an unambiguous measure of task performance, unlike in neurobiology where a circuit's performance quality may usually only be guessed. As a result, researchers have explored the actual shapes of deep neural network parameter optimality landscapes in some detail [50]. Their two main relevant findings are as follows: first, these systems tend to have many local optima, but in high–dimensional parameter space, the optima are almost always connected by continuous paths along some small subset of dimensions [33]. The corresponding implication for neuroscience is that there may be some small, special combinations of neural circuit parameters that can be targeted for interventions, which can effectively move the system towards optima while minimising the risk of severe detriments. Second, some optima are wide while others are narrow, with parameters in wide optima resulting in better generalisation performance for new input signals [51,52]. In neuroscience, wide optima may also be desirable from a robustness point of view: they would be more tolerant to biological noise or drift in circuit parameters over time. Wide optima could be selectively targeted when designing brain disorder interventions by probing a range of different parameter values near the optimum, analogous to the ways deep neural network training algorithms are modified to bias the search process towards wide optima.

Alt-text: Box 2

Funding sources

This work was supported by funding from the 10.13039/100014370 Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative (RPG-2019-229) and the 10.13039/501100000265 Medical Research Council (MR/S026630/1).

Conflict of interest statement

Nothing declared.
==== Refs
References

1 Marder E. Variability, compensation, and modulation in neurons and circuits Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 Suppl 3 2011 15542 15548 21383190
2 Doyle J.C. Csete M. Architecture, constraints, and behavior 108 2011 15624 15630 Suppl 3
3 Marder E. Goaillard J.-M. Variability, compensation and homeostasis in neuron and network function Nat Rev Neurosci 7 2006 563 574 16791145
4 Prinz A.A. Bucher D. Marder E. Similar network activity from disparate circuit parameters Nat Neurosci 7 2004 1345 1352 15558066
5 O'Leary T. Williams A.H. Franci A. Marder E. Cell types, network homeostasis, and pathological compensation from a biologically plausible ion channel expression model Neuron 82 2014 809 821 24853940
6 Schulz D.J. Goaillard J.-M. Marder E. Variable channel expression in identified single and electrically coupled neurons in different animals Nat Neurosci 9 2006 356 362 16444270
7 Foster W.R. Ungar L.H. Schwaber J.S. Significance of conductances in Hodgkin-Huxley models J Neurophysiol 70 1993 2502 2518 7509859
8 Rathour R.K. Narayanan R. Homeostasis of functional maps in active dendrites emerges in the absence of individual channelostasis Proc Natl Acad Sci Unit States Am 111 2014 E1787 E1796
9 Ciarleglio C.M. Khakhalin A.S. Wang A.F. Constantino A.C. Yip S.P. Aizenman C.D. Multivariate analysis of electrophysiological diversity of Xenopus visual neurons during development and plasticity eLife 4 2015 e11351 26568314
10 Panas D. Amin H. Maccione A. Muthmann O. van Rossum M. Berdondini L. Hennig M.H. Sloppiness in spontaneously active neuronal networks J Neurosci 35 2015 8480 8492 26041916
Ponce-Alvarez A. Mochol G. Hermoso-Mendizabal A. de la Rocha J. Deco G. Cortical state transitions and stimulus response evolve along stiff and sloppy parameter dimensions, respectively eLife 9 2020 e53268 32181740
The authors fit a model to neural population activity data from the auditory cortex of anaesthetised rats, and found that cortical transitions between synchronised and desynchronised states happen along stiff parameter directions, while stimulus-evoked activity evolved along sloppy directions in parameter space. These correspondences provide evidence that the concept of sloppiness is relevant for neural circuit function.

12 Bassett D.S. Wymbs N.F. Rombach M.P. Porter M.A. Mucha P.J. Grafton S.T. Task-based core-periphery organization of human brain dynamics PLoS Comput Biol 9 2013 e1003171 24086116
13 Machta B.B. Chachra R. Transtrum M.K. Sethna J.P. Parameter space compression underlies emergent theories and predictive models Science 342 2013 604 607 24179222
14 Whitacre J. Bender A. Degeneracy: a design principle for achieving robustness and evolvability J Theor Biol 263 2010 143 153 19925810
15 Edelman G.M. Gally J.A. Degeneracy and complexity in biological systems Proc Natl Acad Sci Unit States Am 98 2001 13763 13768
16 Smoller J.W. Andreassen O.A. Edenberg H.J. Faraone S.V. Glatt S.J. Kendler K.S. Psychiatric genetics and the structure of psychopathology Mol Psychiatr 24 2019 409 420
17 Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci Nature 511 2014 421 427 25056061
Satterstrom F.K. Kosmicki J.A. Wang J. Breen M.S. De Rubeis S. An J.-Y. Peng M. Collins R. Grove J. Klei L. Large-scale exome sequencing study implicates both developmental and functional changes in the neurobiology of autism Cell 180 2020 568 584 e23 31981491
This large-scale genetics study analysed exome sequences from ~35,000 people, ~12,000 of whom were diagnosed with ASD. They identified 102 distinct genes where variants increased statistical risk for autism. This highlights the vast heterogeneity of autism at the genetic level, and implies strong convergences from genotype to cognitive phenotype.

19 Gandal M.J. Haney J.R. Parikshak N.N. Leppa V. Ramaswami G. Hartl C. Schork A.J. Appadurai V. Buil A. Werge T.M. Shared molecular neuropathology across major psychiatric disorders parallels polygenic overlap Science 359 2018 693 697 29439242
20 Consortium T.B. Anttila V. Bulik-Sullivan B. Finucane H.K. Walters R.K. Bras J. Duncan L. Escott-Price V. Falcone G.J. Gormley P. Analysis of shared heritability in common disorders of the brain Science 2018 360
21 Hyman S.E. Revitalizing psychiatric therapeutics Neuropsychopharmacology 39 2014 220 229 24317307
22 Contractor A. Klyachko V.A. Portera-Cailliau C. Altered neuronal and circuit excitability in fragile X syndrome Neuron 87 2015 699 715 26291156
23 Akil H. Brenner S. Kandel E. Kendler K.S. King M.-C. Scolnick E. Watson J.D. Zoghbi H.Y. The future of psychiatric research: genomes and neural circuits Science 327 2010 1580 1581 20339051
24 Belmonte M.K. Cook E.H. Anderson G.M. Rubenstein J.L.R. Greenough W.T. Beckel-Mitchener A. Courchesne E. Boulanger L.M. Powell S.B. Levitt P.R. Autism as a disorder of neural information processing: directions for research and targets for therapy Mol Psychiatr 9 2004 646 663
25 Sterling P. Laughlin S. Principles of neural design 2015 MIT Press
Alonso L.M. Marder E. Temperature compensation in a small rhythmic circuit eLife 9 2020 e55470 32484437
This computational modelling study explored why different configurations of the crustacean stomatogastric ganglion pyloric circuit are differentially sensitive to temperature changes. They found that, although each model realisation showed the same qualitative dynamical transitions as a function of temperature, the quantitative temperature where the transitions occurred varied substantially from configuration to configuration. They also found that the same parameter perturbation could have different effects on a model, depending on the temperature. This illustrates how heterogeneity in responses to external stressors or pharmaceutical treatments may arise across patient cohorts.

27 Ratliff J. Marder E. O'Leary T. Neural circuit robustness to acute, global physiological perturbations bioRxiv 2018 10.1101/480830
28 Haddad S.A. Marder E. Circuit robustness to temperature perturbation is altered by neuromodulators Neuron 100 2018 609 623.e3 30244886
Onasch S. Gjorgjieva J. Circuit stability to perturbations reveals hidden variability in the balance of intrinsic and synaptic conductances J Neurosci 40 2020 3186 3202 32179572
This computational modelling study analysed simulations of small pacemaker neural circuits and found that molecularly different versions of the circuit that appear similar at the functional level can nevertheless show differential responses to perturbations. Using a global stability analysis and clustering, they also demonstrate how perturbations can be used to characterise a circuit's stability even in the absence of complete circuit knowledge.

30 Gutenkunst R.N. Waterfall J.J. Casey F.P. Brown K.S. Myers C.R. Sethna J.P. Universally sloppy parameter sensitivities in systems biology models PLoS Comput Biol 3 2007 1871 1878 17922568
31 Transtrum M.K. Machta B.B. Brown K.S. Daniels B.C. Myers C.R. Sethna J.P. Perspective: sloppiness and emergent theories in physics, biology, and beyond J Chem Phys 143 2015 10901
32 Marder E. Taylor A.L. Multiple models to capture the variability in biological neurons and networks Nat Neurosci 14 2011 133 138 21270780
33 Dauphin Y. Pascanu R. Gulcehre C. Cho K. Ganguli S. Bengio Y. Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in high-dimensional non-convex optimization 2014 arXiv:14062572 [cs, math, stat]
Booker S.A. Simões de Oliveira L. Anstey N.J. Kozic Z. Dando O.R. Jackson A.D. Baxter P.S. Isom L.L. Sherman D.L. Hardingham G.E. Input-output relationship of CA1 pyramidal neurons reveals intact homeostatic mechanisms in a mouse model of fragile X syndrome Cell Rep 32 2020 107988 32783927
This study used electrophysiology and fluorescence microscopy to examine homeostatic excitability changes in Fmr1 knock-out (KO) hippocampal neurons, both in ex vivo slices and in vitro cultures. The authors found that although Fmr1 KO CA1 pyramidal neurons increased excitability, in part due to elongation of the axon initial segment, this was balanced by a reduction in the strength of synaptic inputs from the entorhinal cortex to these neurons. The net effect was that there was no change in the measured input–output function, demonstrating redundancy. This study also emphasises the need to study circuit input–output functions, as measuring cellular excitability alone would have resulted in a different conclusion.

Bülow P. Murphy T.J. Bassell G.J. Wenner P. Homeostatic intrinsic plasticity is functionally altered in Fmr1 KO cortical neurons Cell Rep 26 2019 1378 1388.e3 30726724
This study examined homeostatic plasticity of intrinsic excitability in cultured cortical neurons from both wild-type and Fmr1 knock-out mice, a model for Fragile-X Syndrome. They first found that neither baseline excitability nor homeostatic excitability changes following activity deprivation were altered in Fmr1 knock-outs (KO), according to classic measures such as input resistance and current threshold. Interestingly however, the Fmr1 KO neurons did not change their firing properties in the same way as the wild-type neurons did under activity deprivation. Such spike properties are arguably more relevant to the neuron's input–output function than cellular parameters like input resistance. Therefore this study highlights the importance of focusing on net neuronal circuit function alterations in brain disorders, rather than the cellular parameters themselves.

Domanski A.P.F. Booker S.A. Wyllie D.J.A. Isaac J.T.R. Kind P.C. Cellular and synaptic phenotypes lead to disrupted information processing in Fmr1 - KO mouse layer 4 barrel cortex Nat Commun 10 2019 4814 31645553
This tour-de-force electrophysiology and computational modelling study examined integration of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs in layer 4 somatosensory cortex of wild-type and Fmr1 knock-out (KO) mice, a model for Fragile-X Syndrome. The authors found a variety of cellular and synaptic alterations in the Fmr1 KO mice, many of which apparently opposed each other, suggesting partial homeostatic compensation. The authors integrated their findings into single-cell and network computational models, and attempted to rescue wild-type function by reverting various subsets of the parameters in the Fmr1 KO model back to wild-type values. Interestingly, while some parameter reversals improved Fmr1 KO circuit dysfunction, others exacerbated it. This study shows the analytical power of a computational-model-based, circuit-function-centric approach to dissecting brain disorders.

37 Davenport E.C. Szulc B.R. Drew J. Taylor J. Morgan T. Higgs N.F. López-Doménech G. Kittler J.T. Autism and schizophrenia-associated CYFIP1 regulates the balance of synaptic excitation and inhibition Cell Rep 26 2019 2037 2051.e6 30784587
38 Sun Q. Turrigiano G.G. PSD-95 and PSD-93 play critical but distinct roles in synaptic scaling up and down J Neurosci 31 2011 6800 6808 21543610
39 Crabtree G.W. Sun Z. Kvajo M. Broek J.A.C. Fénelon K. McKellar H. Xiao L. Xu B. Bahn S. O'Donnell J.M. Alteration of neuronal excitability and short-term synaptic plasticity in the prefrontal cortex of a mouse model of mental illness J Neurosci 37 2017 4158 4180 28283561
40 Tatavarty V. Torrado Pacheco A. Groves Kuhnle C. Lin H. Koundinya P. Miska N.J. Hengen K.B. Wagner F.F. Van Hooser S.D. Turrigiano G.G. Autism-Associated Shank3 is essential for homeostatic compensation in rodent V1 Neuron 106 2020 769 777.e4 32199104
41 Ellingford R.A. Meritens ER de Shaunak R. Naybour L. Basson M.A. Andreae L.C. Cell-type-specific synaptic imbalance and disrupted homeostatic plasticity in cortical circuits of ASD-associated Chd8 haploinsufficient mice bioRxiv 2020 10.1101/2020.05.14.093187
42 Krystal J.H. Anticevic A. Yang G.J. Dragoi G. Driesen N.R. Wang X.-J. Murray J.D. Impaired tuning of neural ensembles and the pathophysiology of schizophrenia: a translational and computational neuroscience perspective Biol Psychiatr 81 2017 874 885
43 Anticevic A. Lisman J. How can global alteration of excitation/inhibition balance lead to the local dysfunctions that underlie schizophrenia? Biol Psychiatr 81 2017 818 820
44 Calvin O.L. Redish A.D. Global disruption in excitation-inhibition balance can cause localized network dysfunction and Schizophrenia-like context-integration deficits PLoS Comput Biol 17 2021 e1008985
Antoine M.W. Langberg T. Schnepel P. Feldman D.E. Increased excitation-inhibition ratio stabilizes synapse and circuit excitability in four autism mouse models Neuron 101 2019 648 661.e4 30679017
This excellent study measured excitatory and inhibitory synapse changes in the cortex of four mouse models of autism, compared with wild-type mice. They found that although the ratio of excitation/inhibition was increased in all autism models when measuring synaptic conductances directly, the predicted combined post-synaptic potential was unaltered compared to wild-type. They went on to show how this redundancy arises using computational models.

46 Rubenstein J.L.R. Merzenich M.M. Model of autism: increased ratio of excitation/inhibition in key neural systems Gene Brain Behav 2 2003 255 267
47 Lee E. Lee J. Kim E. Excitation/inhibition imbalance in animal models of autism Spectrum disorders Biol Psychiatr 81 2017 838 847
O'Donnell C. Gonçalves J.T. Portera-Cailliau C. Sejnowski T.J. Beyond excitation/inhibition imbalance in multidimensional models of neural circuit changes in brain disorders elife 6 2017 3116
This study found evidence for sloppiness in a computational model of rodent layer 2/3 somatosensory cortex, where some cellular parameter alterations cause three to four orders of magnitude greater changes in circuit input–output function than others. The authors then fit a simple input–output model to neural population data from wild-type mice and mouse models of Fragile-X Syndrome, and found a difference in neural correlations between genotypes that depended jointly on two model parameters, which therefore could not be corrected by varying one parameter in isolation.

49 Gonçalves J.T. Anstey J.E. Golshani P. Portera-Cailliau C. Circuit level defects in the developing neocortex of Fragile X mice Nat Neurosci 16 2013 903 909 23727819
50 Li H. Xu Z. Taylor G. Studer C. Goldstein T. Visualizing the loss landscape of neural nets Bengio S. Wallach H. Larochelle H. Grauman K. Cesa-Bianchi N. Garnett R. Advances in neural information processing systems 2018 Curran Associates, Inc.
51 Hochreiter S. Schmidhuber J. Flat minima Neural Comput 9 1997 1 42 9117894
52 Keskar N.S. Mudigere D. Nocedal J. Smelyanskiy M. Tang P.T.P. On large-batch training for deep learning: generalization gap and sharp minima 5th international conference on learning representations 2017 ICLR Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings. . 2017

