
==== Front
Alcohol Res
Alcohol Res
Alcohol Research : Current Reviews
2168-3492
2169-4796
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

35223337
10.35946/arcr.v42.1.03
arcr-42-1-3
Alcohol Research: Current Reviews
The Synaptic Interactions of Alcohol and the Endogenous Cannabinoid System
Wolfe Sarah A.
Vozella Valentina
Roberto Marisa
Department of Molecular Medicine, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California
Correspondence: Address correspondence concerning this article to Marisa Roberto, Ph.D., Department of Molecular Medicine, Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. Torrey Pines Road, SR-305, La Jolla, CA 92037. Email: mroberto@scripps.edu
2022
27 1 2022
42 1 032022
https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/ Unless otherwise noted in the text, all material appearing in this journal is in the public domain and may be reproduced without permission. Citation of the source is appreciated.
PURPOSE

A growing body of evidence has implicated the endocannabinoid (eCB) system in the acute, chronic, and withdrawal effects of alcohol/ethanol on synaptic function. These eCB-mediated synaptic effects may contribute to the development of alcohol use disorder (AUD). Alcohol exposure causes neurobiological alterations similar to those elicited by chronic cannabinoid (CB) exposure. Like alcohol, cannabinoids alter many central processes, such as cognition, locomotion, synaptic transmission, and neurotransmitter release. There is a strong need to elucidate the effects of ethanol on the eCB system in different brain regions to understand the role of eCB signaling in AUD.

SEARCH METHODS

For the scope of this review, preclinical studies were identified through queries of the PubMed database.

SEARCH RESULTS

This search yielded 459 articles. Clinical studies and papers irrelevant to the topic of this review were excluded.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The endocannabinoid system includes, but is not limited to, cannabinoid receptors 1 (CB1), among the most abundantly expressed neuronal receptors in the brain; cannabinoid receptors 2 (CB2); and endogenously formed CB1 ligands, including arachidonoylethanolamide (AEA; anandamide), and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG). The development of specific CB1 agonists, such as WIN 55,212-2 (WIN), and antagonists, such as SR 141716A (rimonabant), provide powerful pharmacological tools for eCB research. Alcohol exposure has brain region–specific effects on the eCB system, including altering the synthesis of endocannabinoids (e.g., AEA, 2-AG), the synthesis of their precursors, and the density and coupling efficacy of CB1. These alcohol-induced alterations of the eCB system have subsequent effects on synaptic function including neuronal excitability and postsynaptic conductance. This review will provide a comprehensive evaluation of the current literature on the synaptic interactions of alcohol exposure and eCB signaling systems, with an emphasis on molecular and physiological synaptic effects of alcohol on the eCB system. A limited volume of studies has focused on the underlying interactions of alcohol and the eCB system at the synaptic level in the brain. Thus, the data on synaptic interactions are sparse, and future research addressing these interactions is much needed.

endocannabinoid
alcohol use disorder
alcohol
synaptic
cannabis use disorder
cannabinoid receptor
cannabis
neurobiology
==== Body
pmcAlcohol use disorder (AUD) is a chronic, relapsing brain disorder, characterized by a compromised ability to control alcohol use despite adverse occupational, social, or health consequences. Results from a 2019 National Survey on Drug Use and Health found that 5% of individuals over age 12 had AUD, affecting 14.5 million people in the United States. Alcohol and cannabis products are a common polydrug combination.1 Use of cannabinoids and alcohol alters many central processes, such as cognition, locomotion, and neuropeptide signaling.2 Cannabis use is associated with the development and maintenance of AUD,3 and individuals with cannabis use disorder (CUD) have an increased likelihood for development of comorbid AUD and double the risk for long-term problem drinking.3 The risks associated with polysubstance use with alcohol and cannabis are greater than those associated with use of either drug alone.3 Decriminalization has increased the availability and use of cannabis products4 and polysubstance use, raising multiple social and health concerns.5,6

The high prevalence of comorbid AUD and CUD may be explained, in part, through findings indicating that alcohol and cannabis serve as a substitute for one another, as both have overall depressing effects on the central nervous system (CNS) and produce feelings of intoxication and euphoria.7–9 Additionally, chronic ethanol administration in animal models causes neurobiological alterations similar to those elicited by chronic cannabinoid exposure,10 and shared physiological and biochemical mechanisms may contribute to their combined use. Although cannabis and alcohol have varying targets and effects, both have been shown to interact through the endogenous cannabinoid (endocannabinoid [eCB]) system.11 Ethanol changes the eCB system by altering the synthesis of eCBs, the synthesis of their precursors, and the density and coupling efficacy of cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1), a G protein–coupled receptor and a major receptor of the eCB system.12–14 Furthermore, eCBs acting at CB1 can modulate alcohol consumption in rats by affecting the activity of brain reward systems15–17 and the function of the eCB system in AUD.18–20

Few studies have combined these two lines of research to fully understand the neurobiological substrates and synaptic interactions of alcohol and eCBs, or the therapeutic potential of targeting the eCB system for treating AUD. Therefore, this review provides an overview of the literature concerning how alcohol administration dysregulates eCB signaling and modulates eCB-mediated synaptic function. An emphasis is given to brain regions highly implicated in AUD and existing pharmacotherapies that target the eCB system and influence alcohol-perturbed synaptic functions. Additionally, a discussion of suggested future directions is provided to assist in addressing the lack of insights on the mechanisms and specific circuits at work in the synaptic interactions between alcohol and the eCB system.

The current literature indicates an urgent need for mechanistic studies to shed light on how perturbation of the brain eCB system contributes to development of AUD.

Method

For the scope of this review, preclinical studies were identified through queries of the PubMed database. The initial PubMed searches were undertaken in March 2021, with a final updated search date of June 2021, using the following terms: (endocannabinoids OR cannabinoid OR CB1 OR CB2 OR anandamide OR 2-arachidonoylglycerol OR FAAH OR MAGL OR DAGL OR NAPE-PLD) AND (chronic OR acute OR alcohol OR ethanol OR withdrawal) AND (hippocampus OR amygdala OR nucleus accumbens OR ventral tegmental area OR striatum OR cerebellum OR cortex OR prefrontal cortex) AND (synaptic OR synapse). This search yielded 459 articles. All articles containing relevant information and supporting the topics discussed in this review were included. These articles include research and findings related to the endocannabinoid pathway and acute, chronic, and withdrawal alcohol interactions in all brain regions and in specific regard to interactions pertaining to synaptic structure, function, and adaptations. Articles were excluded if they pertained only to clinical research, behavioral research, or findings outside of the brain and unrelated to synaptic/neuronal function. To support the topics covered, this review includes additional citations that did not appear in the search but that were considered relevant.

Results

The Endogenous Cannabinoid System: An Overview

The cannabinoid receptors were identified in the late 1980s, 2 decades after the discovery of the bioactive and psychoactive effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).21,22 THC is one of 500 different compounds found in the plant Cannabis sativa, 85 of which are known cannabinoids (CBs).23 THC is the compound mainly responsible for the psychotropic effects of cannabis and elicits its psychoactive effects through binding specific G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), termed cannabinoid receptors.21,22 Two types of cannabinoid receptors were discovered via molecular cloning, the cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1)24 and the cannabinoid receptor type 2 (CB2).25–27 CB1 is the most abundant GPCR in the mammalian brain, where it is primarily found on presynaptic terminals. CB1 is also expressed at lower, but physiologically relevant, levels in most peripheral tissues.20,28 CB2 is abundant in the peripheral systems, and predominantly expressed in cells of the immune and hematopoietic systems. CB2 is also present in the CNS, but at much lower concentrations compared to CB1.25,26,29,30 Discovering the role of CB2 in the CNS is still ongoing.26,31 Both CB1 and CB2 are primarily positively coupled to Gi/Go proteins, and generally signal through inhibition of adenylate cyclase (AC), inhibition of calcium channels, and activation of potassium channels, thus regulating numerous cellular processes.19,20,28,32

The discovery of these specific CB receptors led to the isolation of their endogenously formed ligands, including two lipid-derived principal eCBs, arachidonoylethanolamide (anandamide [AEA]) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG).33–36 AEA is a partial agonist with high affinity for CB1, whereas 2-AG is a full agonist with a lower affinity for CB1.37 Other GPCRs and other targets also recognize CBs and related endogenous lipids; however, their role is less well understood.38,39 For instance, both AEA and 2-AG bind to and activate the postsynaptic transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 and are agonists for several subtypes of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor family.40 AEA and 2-AG are synthesized on demand from membrane phospholipid precursors. These eCBs are arachidonic acid derivatives, biosynthesized through a combination of several pathways.19,41 AEA is mainly synthesized by the enzyme N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D (NAPE-PLD),42 but other enzymes important for synthesis include glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase 1 (GDE1), abhydrolase domain containing 4 (ABHD4) and the protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22).19,41 AEA is primarily catabolized by fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), a serine hydrolase,43 and 2-AG is synthesized from diacylglycerol (DAG) through the catalytic activity of diacylglycerol lipase alpha (DAGL-alpha) and DAGL-beta.29,44 Catabolism of 2-AG occurs primarily by monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL),45 but other relevant contributors include abhydrolase domain containing 6 and 12 (ABHD6 and ABHD12).46

The eCB system is essential to many cellular processes and is implicated in signaling cascades that modulate synaptic processes such as calcium signaling, synaptic transmission, and neurotransmitter release.19,28,41 In neurons, eCBs are synthesized and released postsynaptically, on demand, and in response to synaptic activity/membrane depolarization through calcium-dependent processes. The eCBs signal in a retrograde manner by traversing the synapse to bind their targets (i.e., CB1) on the presynaptic membrane.

The eCBs activate CB1 on both gamma-aminobutyric acid-ergic (GABAergic)47–49 and glutamatergic terminals.50 This presynaptic CB1 activation provides feedback inhibition via the suppression of neurotransmitter release51,52 in both inhibitory53–55 and excitatory synapses.56 However, alternative mechanisms for eCB release and CB1 activation do occur; for example, the activity of metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 5 (mGluR5)57 and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors58,59 can stimulate eCB production and subsequent release to bind and activate presynaptic CB1 receptors.60–64 The eCB system therefore serves as a critical mechanism for modulating neuronal activity. CB1 activation can lead to short- and long-term forms of plasticity, such as depolarization-induced suppression of inhibition/excitation and a form of synaptic long-term depression.65,66 Long-term depression is characterized by a reduction in the efficacy of synapses in an activity-dependent manner.65,66 The induction of these different forms of plasticity is probably linked to the activation of postsynaptic neurons that modulate concentration of eCBs at the synapse, the timing of CB1 activation, and downstream effectors.67 CB2 is involved in a long-lasting cell-type–specific form of plasticity that triggers neuronal hyperpolarization.68 The eCB system functions are reviewed by Lu and Anderson,29 Basavarajappa,32 and Basavarajappa et al.41 Figure 1 provides a summary schematic of synaptic eCB signaling.

The Endocannabinoid Pathway and Alcohol Interactions

There is a high degree of comorbidity between AUD and CUD, which indicates a functional link between alcohol and cannabis.18 Synergistic effects also have been observed in rodents. For instance, co-administration of ethanol and cannabinoids has additive effects on some behaviors such as sleep,69 cognitive, psychomotor, and attention deficits.70 Additionally, alcohol and cannabis use might cause cross-tolerance,18,71 and acute tolerance of alcohol is thought to be mediated through the eCB system.72 Synergistic behaviors are reviewed by Pava and Woodward,18 Basavarajappa et al.,19 Kunos,20 and Henderson-Redmond et al.73

Although the focus of this review is the synaptic mechanisms of eCBs and alcohol, a brief description of the behavioral implications is provided for context throughout. The eCB system has emerged as a promising druggable target for the development of therapeutic options to treat AUD. Pharmacological modulation of the eCB system by CB receptor agonists, antagonists, eCB-degrading enzyme inhibitors, or anandamide transporter inhibitors alters the alcohol-related behaviors in rodents. Rats treated with CB1 antagonist SR 141716A (rimonabant), or its analog surinabant (SR 147778), showed reduced alcohol consumption and motivation to consume alcohol in various drinking models.74–79 CB1 agonists WIN 55,212-2 (WIN) and CP 55,940 increased ethanol consumption and preference in mice and rats.80,81 Activation of CB2 signaling using the agonist JWH133 seems to reduce both alcohol- and food-rewarding behaviors.82 The expression and function of CB1 receptors and FAAH are altered in AUD,83,84 and pretreatment with the FAAH inhibitor URB597 reduced alcohol intake and preference after acute withdrawal through a CB1-mediated mechanism.85 However, URB597 administration increased operant ethanol self-administration in rats,84 whereas AEA transport blocker AM404 had efficacy in reducing ethanol self-administration in rodent models.86 The discrepancy between the effects of the FAAH inhibitor URB59784 and the AEA transport blocker in models of alcohol self-administration might be due to the mechanism of action of AM404,86 which does not involve the CB1 receptor, given that the administration of CB1 antagonists or agonists does not affect alcohol self-administration.86 Interestingly, recent findings from Soria-Gomez et al. have shown that the activation of CB1 at different subcellular locations (plasma membrane vs. mitochondria) within the same circuit is associated with opposite behavioral outcomes.87 This observation might shed light on why alcohol often has discrepant effects on the activation or inhibition of the eCB system and vice versa.87

Ethanol and cannabinoids induce neurophysiological consequences through their interaction with specific substrates (i.e., receptors and enzymes). Although cannabinoids primarily modulate synaptic neurotransmission via the eCB system, ethanol interacts with a variety of different molecular substrates that affect a diverse range of neurochemical processes. The eCB system plays a critical role in mediating the effects of ethanol in the brain, contributing to ethanol-induced biochemical, genetic, electrophysiological, and behavioral consequences. This suggests that eCB signaling contributes to the underlying neuropathology that drives AUD.18 Despite this strong brain implication, the synaptic mechanisms of alcohol and eCB signaling are still not fully investigated, and some brain regions involved in the addiction cycle are relatively unexplored. Additionally, alcohol paradigms vary across studies, and acute, chronic, and withdrawal exposures are not fully characterized within specific brain regions. Therefore, the following discussion of the current literature on synaptic eCB and alcohol interactions is divided into two main sections: (1) acute alcohol exposure and (2) chronic alcohol exposure and withdrawal. Each section is subdivided by brain region—where data are available—including the hippocampus, amygdala, prefrontal cortex, basolateral amygdala (BLA), nucleus accumbens (NAc), ventral tegmental area (VTA), striatum, and cerebellum.

Acute Alcohol Exposure and eCB System Interactions

Acute alcohol exposure produces intoxicating effects by acting on the CNS, both at low and high concentrations (1–100 mM) in preclinical animal or cell culture experiments and nontolerant humans.88 Acute concentrations of ethanol can directly interact with several molecules and have specific effects on different brain regions.89 Ethanol has rapid acute effects on the function of proteins involved in excitatory and inhibitory synaptic transmission.88 Some of these effects are mediated by eCB signaling and subsequent alterations in neurotransmission and synaptic activity. However, the eCB system is complex, and ethanol-induced effects are brain region–specific and sensitive to the exposure methodology used. Therefore, discrepancies between studies occur, possibly because of differences in methodology, tissue/cell culture, and ethanol exposure paradigm.

Hippocampus

Acute alcohol exposure is known to affect hippocampal function and to impact contextual and episodic memory by altering neuronal processes.90 In general, acute alcohol exposure consistently decreases eCB (AEA, 2-AG) levels as measured directly in tissue of the striatum, hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and cerebellum.91–93 The decreases in eCBs observed are not due to increased metabolism by FAAH activity and therefore are not mediated by metabolic activity and degradation of eCBs.91 Furthermore, FAAH activity in the hippocampus was transiently decreased 45 minutes post intraperitoneal (IP) injection of ethanol (4 g/kg).91 However, as stated earlier, discrepancies between studies occur, possibly due to methodology, differences in tissues/cell cultures, and ethanol exposure paradigm. For example, in contrast to the above studies, acute alcohol exposure in hippocampal neurons increased both AEA and 2-AG levels via a calcium-dependent mechanism and subsequently inhibited presynaptic glutamate release.94 Acute ethanol exposure did not alter CB1 presynaptic expression but did enhance both AEA and 2-AG.94 Ethanol-induced alterations in CB receptor activity and eCB levels affect the eCB system and may lead to disruptions in synaptic function. Ethanol decreases the frequencies, but not amplitude, of spontaneous miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs), suggesting inhibition of vesicular glutamate release and suppression of synaptic functions.94 These studies overall demonstrate the complex role of eCB signaling in regulating ethanol-induced effects in the hippocampus.

Cannabinoids and acute alcohol exposure alter synaptic transmission in the hippocampus through the eCB system. Specifically, cannabinoid exposure inhibited glutamatergic synaptic transmission in hippocampal cultures95 and inhibited calcium currents in cell cultures.96 In rat hippocampal cultures, the cannabimimetic WIN inhibited N- and P/Q-type calcium channels through the CB1 receptor whereas the nonpsychoactive enantiomer, WIN 55,212-3, was not effective. Maximal inhibition by the nonclassical cannabinoid agonist CP 55,940 was similar to that seen with maximal concentrations of WIN.97

Amygdala

The extended amygdala represents a macrostructure composed of several basal forebrain structures: the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, central medial amygdala (CeA), and a transition zone in the posterior part of the medial NAc (i.e., posterior shell).98–100 Key elements of the extended amygdala include not only neurotransmitters associated with the positive reinforcing effects of substances such as alcohol, opioids, cocaine, and amphetamines, but also major components of the brain stress systems associated with the negative reinforcement of drug dependence.100–102 CB1 in part regulates the effects of alcohol in CeA neurons, and activation of CB1 attenuates the alcohol effect on the CeA’s gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) system.11 Acute application of ethanol in an ex vivo CeA brain slice induced presynaptic facilitation of GABAergic signaling on rat CeA neurons via increased GABA release.103–105 This ethanol-induced, evoked, and spontaneous GABA release was blocked by CB1 activation via the agonist WIN.54,55 Similarly, superfusion of WIN prevented subsequent ethanol effects on GABAergic transmission. The application of CB1 antagonists rimonabant and AM251 alone augmented GABAergic responses, revealing a tonic eCB activity that decreased inhibitory transmission in CeA via a presynaptic CB1 mechanism. The intracellular calcium chelator BAPTA abolished the ability of AM251 to augment GABA responses, demonstrating the eCB-driven nature and postsynaptic origin of the tonic CB1-dependent control of GABA release. Notably, the ethanol-induced facilitation of GABA release was additive to CB1 blockade, ruling out participation of CB1 in the action of acute ethanol.54,55 These studies on both evoked and spontaneous GABA transmission point to an important role of CB1 in the CeA, in which the eCBs tonically regulate neuronal activity and suggest a potent mechanism for modulating CeA tone during challenge with ethanol.54

CB1 activation is known to decrease glutamate release in many brain areas, including the CeA, of male rodents.51,106 Glutamatergic transmission also was investigated in the CeA of Wistar and Marchigian Sardinian alcohol-preferring (msP) rats.107 Notably, msP rats display enhanced anxiety, stress, and alcohol drinking, simulating the alcohol-dependent phenotype. Findings indicate that acute ethanol application decreases evoked excitatory postsynaptic potential amplitudes in rat CeA. WIN decreased glutamatergic responses via presynaptic mechanisms in male rats only, and combined application of WIN and acute ethanol exposure resulted in strain-specific effects in females.107 No tonic CB1 signaling at glutamatergic synapses in the CeA of any groups, and no interactions with ethanol were observed. Collectively, these observations demonstrate sex strain–specific differences in ethanol and endocannabinoid effects on CeA glutamatergic signaling.107

Basolateral amygdala

The eCB system in the BLA plays a role in gating stress and anxiety responses by modulating GABA and glutamate transmission.108,109 CB1 is highly expressed in cholecystokinin-positive GABAergic interneurons110,111 and at lower levels in glutamatergic pyramidal cells.111 A wide body of work has demonstrated that CB1 activity decreases GABAergic transmission in the BLA.110,112–114 GABAergic transmission in the BLA is increased by acute ethanol exposure in naïve rats via both presynaptic and postsynaptic mechanisms. Although CB1 activation impairs ethanol’s facilitation of GABAergic transmission, ethanol’s presynaptic site of action is likely independent of CB1, given that acute ethanol application further increases GABA release in the presence of a CB1 antagonist.115 CB1 antagonism with rimonabant or chronic pretreatment with CB1 agonist WIN attenuates acute alcohol-induced inhibition of neuronal firing in the BLA.116 Further evidence shows that eCBs are either not released or cannot activate CB1 receptors in the presence of ethanol, resulting in GABAergic transmission under conditions when they would normally be suppressed.117 Interestingly, ethanol prevented depolarization-induced suppression of inhibition even when the postsynaptic neuron was loaded with AEA during the experiment, suggesting that increasing the eCBs available for release could not overcome the ethanol effect.117

Nucleus accumbens

The NAc mediates emotional and reward-related stimuli by integrating signals from the limbic system.101,118,119 In the NAc, acute ethanol altered eCB system components, which may affect NAc function. Acute alcohol IP administration (15% ethanol, 4 g/kg) increased AEA and CB1 binding in rat NAc120 and in immature mouse hippocampus and cortex.121 Therefore, acute alcohol enables eCB synthesis and release.94,116 Self-administration of ethanol (10% for 30 minutes) by rats acutely increased 2-AG interstitial levels in the NAc shell during ethanol exposure with no concurrent alteration in AEA, as measured by in vivo microdialysis. Interestingly, the relative change in dialysate 2-AG levels was positively correlated with the amount of ethanol consumed.122

In the NAc, acute ethanol exposure enhances dopamine release, which can be inhibited by blockade or genetic ablation of CB1, suggesting that acute alcohol exposure facilitates the dopaminergic system via the eCB system.123 In awake, freely moving rats, acute ethanol treatment (IP injection) induced a dose-dependent release of dopamine in the dopaminergic projection area of the NAc.124 This ethanol-induced release of dopamine was exacerbated in alcohol-preferring rats when compared to alcohol-avoiding rats.125 With CB1 activation (via THC or WIN), dopamine release was elicited in the rat NAc shell similarly to that induced by alcohol,126 and CB1 activity induced an increase in spontaneous firing due to inhibition of GABAergic inputs onto projections of dopaminergic neurons to the NAc (see the VTA section below for detail).127–129 Modulation of the dopamine system in the NAc is complex, and activation of CB1 on prefrontal cortex glutamatergic terminals in the NAc reduces glutamatergic transmission and consequently dopamine. This may limit the rewarding effects of acute alcohol exposure.130

Ventral tegmental area

The VTA is known to mediate the positive reinforcement effect of alcohol. Dopaminergic neurotransmission in the VTA was identified as a key mechanism for the establishment and maintenance of alcohol intake.131 Similar to the NAc, acute alcohol exposure increased the firing rate of VTA dopaminergic neurons in a CB1-dependent manner.17 CB1 is not expressed on dopaminergic neurons in the VTA; therefore, the eCB-induced increase in dopamine release in the VTA is mediated by CB1 activity on inhibitory GABAergic interneurons. This results in disinhibition of dopaminergic neurons in the VTA and increased dopamine release in the NAc.128,129

Striatum

The striatum is implicated in habit formation and motivation or goal-directed actions, and acute alcohol exposure disrupts the stability of striatal neuronal circuits.132 In the striatum, the physiological effects of acute ethanol exposure appear to oppose, or are antagonized by, eCB signaling mechanisms. In the rat dorsomedial striatum, acute alcohol exposure inhibited eCB release from medium spiny neurons, preventing lasting disinhibition. This effect was found to be independent of eCB synthesis and CB1 activity. In the rat dorsomedial striatum, release of eCBs from medium spiny neurons is associated with disinhibition of these neurons for an extended period of time and decreased synaptic long-term depression. This long-lasting disinhibition can be blocked independently of CB1 activation or synthesis of eCBs by pretreatment with alcohol. Acute ethanol treatment prevents the long-lasting disinhibition induced by the CB1 agonist WIN in rat striatum. These data suggest that the eCB system is involved in the physiological response to acute alcohol intoxication.132

Cerebellum

Cerebellum function can be affected by alcohol, causing disruptions in locomotion, balance, and executive functions. Acute alcohol exposure impairs cerebellar function by altering gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor-mediated neurotransmission.133 Ethanol induces presynaptic GABA release onto cerebellar Purkinje neurons through a pathway that is dependent on protein kinase A (PKA) and that releases calcium from internal stores independent of eCB synthesis.134 In contrast, activation of CB1 in Purkinje neurons inhibits the ethanol-induced GABA release from presynaptic terminals and the frequency of inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs). This blockade of ethanol-induced IPSC frequency is mediated by the PKA pathway, through G protein (Gi)-mediated inhibition of PKA produced by activation of CB1.135 Notably, CB1 activation by WIN also blocked ethanol from increasing spontaneous GABA release onto the interneuron–Purkinje cell synapses in the cerebellum.135

Summary

The above studies (summarized in Table 1) indicate that acute alcohol exposure profoundly affects the eCB system, including expression and function of eCB signaling components that subsequently impact neuronal function and synaptic transmission. It is also evident that acute ethanol exposure differentially affects the eCB system depending on brain region and alcohol administration method. Further difficulties in elucidating alcohol and the eCB system interactions arise from the complexity of the eCB pathway due to its retrograde signaling on both GABAergic and glutamatergic synapses.20,29,32,41 Additionally, factors such as the state of tissue or cells under study (ex vivo, in vivo, or in vitro) or the species (mice or rats) may affect results.18 Although alcohol-related behavioral studies implicate the importance of the eCB system, the underlying effects induced by acute ethanol exposure on the synaptic interactions between alcohol and the endogenous cannabinoid system are not well understood.

The eCB System in Chronic Alcohol Exposure and Alcohol Withdrawal

Chronic ethanol exposure induces many neuroadaptive changes in the CNS involving both GABAergic and glutamatergic synaptic transmission. Long-term ethanol exposure results in both tolerance and dependence. Tolerance presents as a decreased behavioral response to ethanol and decreased intoxication. Dependence is described by symptomatology elicited during and following ethanol withdrawal, including anxiety, hyperalgesia, dysphoria, susceptibility to seizures, and disrupted sleep states.88 Both chronic ethanol and cannabinoid exposure produce similar adaptations in eCB signaling.10 Cross-tolerance with alcohol and cannabis also is consistent with changes in CB1 expression.18 Preclinical studies using different chronic ethanol treatment models have consistently observed reduced CB1 expression or function in a variety of rodent brain regions136–139 and in alcohol-preferring rats.140–142 However, as with acute exposure to alcohol, effects of chronic alcohol exposure may vary depending on exposure paradigm and may be brain region–specific. In humans, chronic heavy drinking (defined as greater than six drinks per day, where a standard drink contains ~ 10g of ethanol) is linked to reduced CB1 receptor availability and binding in numerous brain regions that persist after prolonged abstinence or withdrawal, and amount of alcohol intake is negatively correlated with years of misuse.137,143 Chronic dysregulation of the eCB system suggests a mechanism underlying the negative affect associated with AUD.20 Although the effects of alcohol withdrawal on the eCB pathway are not well known, alcohol withdrawal in some cases recovers the effects induced by chronic alcohol exposure on components of the eCB system.120,136,144–147

Hippocampus

Chronic ethanol exposure induced structural and functional changes in the hippocampus.118,148,149 This region is also highly sensitive to the damaging effects of chronic alcohol use.90 Multiple studies demonstrate that chronic alcohol exposure and withdrawal dysregulate the hippocampal eCB system. Regional dysfunction was identified in CB1, indicated by reduced relative CB1 binding, in the hippocampus and caudate-putamen of rats exposed to alcohol via liquid diet for 7 days.120 A 7-day alcohol paradigm reduced WIN sensitivity and induced altered monoamine synthesis in the locus coeruleus, hippocampus, and striatum.150 Additionally, genetic deletion of CB1 impaired the neuroadaptations of NMDA and GABAA receptors in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus induced by chronic ethanol treatment, indicating that the eCB system plays a critical role in alcohol dependence.151

Alcohol-dependent rats (52 days of forced access) were found to have reduced CB1 gene expression (measured via Cnr1 messenger RNA [mRNA] levels) in the hippocampus, hypothalamus, and striatum.141 Similarly, chronic intermittent ethanol (CIE) exposure via oral intubation (55 days of forced access followed by 2 days of withdrawal) in rats reduced Cnr1 expression and CB1 levels in the hippocampus.139 In alcohol-preferring msP rats, Cnr1 expression was greater in several brain regions including the frontoparietal cortex, caudate-putamen, and hippocampus, although this was reversed following alcohol self-administration.140 Sardinian alcohol-preferring (sP) rats, compared to alcohol–non-preferring rats, display greater CB1 density, Cnr1 levels, and eCB levels in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and striatum. Reduced FAAH expression also was observed in the hippocampus of sP rats.147 Consistent with these findings, 12 weeks of CIE vapor reduced Cnr1 and CB1 levels in the rat lateral habenula, while enhancing levels of the eCB-related mRNA and/or proteins, DAGL-beta, NAPE-PLD mRNA (napepld), and MAGL.152 In contrast, no change in CB1 receptor binding and mRNA levels occurred in the hippocampus, cerebral cortex, or motor and limbic structures in a chronic ethanol intake model (7% liquid diet for 15 days).153

The eCB system’s role in alcohol withdrawal in the hippocampus is not well understood, and studies are variable. The dysfunction in CB1 identified by Ceccarini et al. was reversed after 2 weeks of abstinence from alcohol.120 However, another study identified lasting effects on eCBs; even with 40 days of withdrawal, alcohol-dependent rats retained enhanced AEA and 2-AG levels in the hippocampus.139 Despite this molecular evidence, synaptic studies on the functional consequences of the changes observed in eCBs are lacking.

Prefrontal cortex

Chronic alcohol exposure affects the structure and function of the prefrontal cortex, causing deficits in executive control, decision-making, and risk management.154 As observed in the hippocampus, chronic alcohol exposure induces alterations in NMDA and GABAA receptor expression in wildtype mice, but not in CB1-depleted mice, indicating that the eCB system plays a critical role in alcohol dependence.151 Additionally, in situ hybridization in msP rats identified that Cnr1 expression is greater in the frontoparietal cortex; this was reversed following alcohol self-administration.140 However, no change in CB1 receptor binding and mRNA levels occurred in the cerebral cortex with chronic ethanol intake (7% liquid diet for 15 days).155

Acute application of the CB1 agonist WIN enhanced the amplitude of the period of depolarization (up states) in slice cultures of the prefrontal cortex but not in slices that underwent 10 days of chronic ethanol treatment followed by 4 days of withdrawal. Chronic ethanol followed by 4 days of withdrawal blunted WIN inhibition of evoked GABA inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) in layer II/III of the pyramidal neurons but not in layer V/VI. WIN inhibited the amplitude of spontaneous GABA IPSCs in both layers and this effect was not altered by ethanol treatment.144 Some studies indicate that alcohol withdrawal may lessen the effects of eCB system alterations induced by chronic alcohol exposure. CIE exposure increased Cnr1 expression in the medial prefrontal cingulate cortex, and alcohol withdrawal recovers the effects of chronic exposure to control levels in rats.145 Acute alcohol withdrawal also produced reduction in gene expression of components of the eCB system and reduced 2-AG content in the medial prefrontal cortex of male rats, but not in female rats.146

Amygdala

In the amygdala, eCB signaling is compromised in alcohol-dependent animal models. Chronic alcohol intake in rats (7% liquid diet for 15 days) induced a decrease in both 2-AG and AEA in the midbrain and an increase in AEA in the limbic forebrain, but no change occurred in CB1 receptor binding and mRNA levels in limbic structures.136,153,155 A chronic ethanol liquid diet (10% ethanol, continuous access for 15 days; or intermittent access for 5 days/week for 3 weeks) followed by acute withdrawal (6 or 24 hours) significantly altered gene expression for a variety of components of the amygdala’s eCB system. Reductions in FAAH, MAGL, CB1, CB2, and GPR55 mRNA were observed, with alteration in MAGL and CB receptor–associated mRNA being more pronounced with intermittent alcohol exposure.156 In the CeA, an alcohol self-administration paradigm decreased 2-AG levels in dependent rats, and MAGL inhibitors increased alcohol consumption.157 In baseline CeA dialysate, AEA and 2-AG levels decreased in ethanol-dependent rats with further decrements during 12-hour withdrawal. Subsequent ethanol consumption restored 2-AG dialysate content to baseline levels.157,158 MsP rats also displayed higher FAAH activity and decreased AEA levels in the CeA as measured by microdialysis.142

GABAergic dysregulation in the CeA is a hallmark of the transition to alcohol dependence in animal models.101 A study by Varodayan and colleagues reported that activation of CB1 via WIN decreased the frequency of spontaneous and miniature CeA GABAA receptor-mediated IPSCs, which could be blocked by CB1 antagonism.55 Two weeks of CIE vapor significantly blunted this effect of WIN. Chronic ethanol exposure abolished tonic CB1 influence on vesicular GABA release, indicating that CB1 function in the CeA is impaired by chronic ethanol exposure.55 Therefore, decreased CB1 activity is likely a factor that contributes to the dysregulated (enhanced) GABA transmission in the CeA with chronic alcohol exposure.55 Altered eCB function may contribute to the dependence-associated disruptions in glutamate and GABA transmission in the CeA.11,103 These findings indicate that eCB signaling is compromised in the amygdala of ethanol-dependent rats, contributing to an allostatic shift toward maintenance of ethanol intake through negative reinforcement.34,54,158

Basolateral amygdala

Chronic ethanol exposure and withdrawal alter synaptic transmission in the BLA.114,116,159–161 Emotional processing is affected by the actions of CB1 on GABA and glutamate neurotransmission in the BLA.108–110,112–114,162,163 Decreased CB1 and increased AEA levels were observed in the BLA with a 10-day CIE vapor paradigm.164 Additionally, ethanol exposure caused a dose-dependent inhibition of glutamatergic synaptic activity via a presynaptic mechanism that was occluded by CB1 antagonists rimonabant and AM251. Importantly, this acute ethanol inhibition was attenuated following CIE.164 Withdrawal produced a reduction in the gene expression of Cnr1 and the protein levels of DAGL-alpha, MAGL, and AEA levels in the BLA of male rats, but not female rats.146 In naïve rats, WIN application decreased GABA release, which was prevented by CB1 antagonist AM251. AM251 increased GABA release via a postsynaptic, calcium-dependent mechanism. This retrograde tonic CB1 signaling was reduced in rats exposed to 2 weeks of CIE, suggesting impaired eCB signaling. These results indicate that CB1 has a critical role in regulating BLA GABAergic transmission, which is dysregulated with chronic ethanol exposure.115

Ventral tegmental area

Few studies have investigated chronic alcohol exposure in the VTA. However, one study conducted in mice identified that VTA GABAA receptor inhibition in dopaminergic neurons was regulated through presynaptic actions of eCBs. The same study showed that withdrawal from CIE vapor exposure increased eCB-mediated inhibition on GABA synapses of VTA dopamine neurons.165 Withdrawal was shown to decrease sensitivity to WIN and enhance sensitivity to AM251, suggesting that GABAA inhibition of dopamine neurons in the VTA is regulated by presynaptic eCB activity and that withdrawal increases eCB-mediated inhibition.165

Striatum

In the rat striatum, chronic alcohol treatment is associated with dysregulation of the eCB system, specifically with a decrease in Cnr1 mRNA levels.140,141 Similar to the cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum, a 72-hour ethanol vapor inhalation paradigm decreased CB1 receptor density and CB1 activation in mouse striatum. These effects were recovered after 24 hours of withdrawal from ethanol, suggesting that these eCB neuroadaptations may play a role in development of tolerance and dependence.136,147 In sP rats, greater CB1 density, CB1 mRNA, CB1-mediated G protein coupling, and eCB levels were observed in the striatum. Alcohol intake (homecage two-bottle free-choice regimen with unlimited access for 24 hours/day for 70 consecutive days) in sP rats reduced CB1-mediated G protein coupling, which was reversed by rimonabant administration, and increased eCBs in the striatum, associating the eCB system with higher alcohol preferences.147 Studies in humans also identified altered eCB signaling components. Human postmortem tissue from patients with AUD has decreased CB1 expression, decreased FAAH expression and activity, and increased AEA levels, all specifically identified in the ventral striatum.166

Additionally, synaptic plasticity may be influenced by ethanol and mediated via the eCB system. CIE vapor in mice abolished CB1-mediated long-term depression in the mouse dorsolateral striatum and increased 2-AG.167 These results suggest that chronic ethanol exposure causes neuroadaptations in the striatum that may contribute to the progression of AUD in humans and alcohol dependence in animals.167

Cerebellum

Analogous to acute exposure, chronic alcohol exposure disrupts cerebellar function through GABAA and eCB mechanisms.133 As in the striatum, chronic ethanol exposure decreased CB1 receptor density and activity in the mouse cerebellum, which was reversed with withdrawal.136 In cultured cerebellar granular neurons and cultured neuronal cells (human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH), 72 hours of ethanol exposure increased the synthesis of AEA and 2-AG through calcium activation of phospholipase A2 and subsequently increased NAPE-PLD activity in cultured cells.19,138,168 Additionally, in mouse synaptic plasma membrane, chronic alcohol exposure decreased the function and expression of CB1.138,169,170 Similarly, chronic alcohol intake induced an increase in AEA levels and a decrease in components of AEA transport and FAAH in cultured cerebellar neurons.171

Summary

Overall, these data (summarized in Table 2) indicate that chronic alcohol exposure compromises CB1 and eCB pathways, and alcohol withdrawal may ameliorate these effects. The chronic alcohol-induced molecular changes in the eCB system—including the synthesis of eCBs and the expression of CB1 and catabolizing enzymes—have a profound impact on neuronal function and synaptic transmission in multiple brain regions.13,155 These effects with alcohol withdrawal may be due to a compensatory effect to regulate neurotransmission and counteract neuroadaptations induced with chronic alcohol exposure. The strong association of polydrug use with alcohol and cannabis products presents the possibility of self-medicating for AUD with cannabis and developing CUD.18,172,173 Further research on the eCB pathways may facilitate the modulation of the eCB system as a target for future AUD treatment.

General Summary and Future Directions

There is clear evidence that the eCB system plays a critical role in the acute effects of alcohol on synaptic functions, and that neuroadaptations occur with chronic alcohol exposure and withdrawal in eCB signaling. The eCB system orchestrates a complex signaling mechanism. Ethanol- and/or withdrawal-induced molecular alterations in the eCB system impact neuronal functions and synaptic transmission in a brain region–specific manner. A variety of studies have demonstrated the potential beneficial effects of several pharmacological approaches for treating AUD by modulating the eCB system.84,156,157,174 A growing number of CB1 and CB2 agonists and antagonists, FAAH and MAGL inhibitors, as well as NAPE-PLD and DAGL inhibitors have been developed in the past 2 decades. However, determining how ethanol exposure affects eCB metabolizing enzymes at the synaptic level requires further research and will provide invaluable insight to guide our understanding of the pathophysiology of alcohol-induced synaptic changes. Specifically, FAAH and MAGL inhibitors have been proven efficacious in ameliorating the negative affect in preclinical models of AUD.157,174–177 However, more research is needed to understand how these compounds affect synaptic transmission.

Many studies have identified the importance of eCB signaling in mediating behavioral responses to alcohol exposure and withdrawal; however, the underlying neuronal mechanism is not well characterized. Unfortunately, the current literature is limited and lacks the consistency (length of ethanol exposure, time of measurements, neurochemicals measured, etc.) across brain regions that is necessary for a more comprehensive understanding of the synaptic interactions of the eCB system and alcohol. However, a few studies that are consistent indicate strong themes within brain regions. For instance, a variety of chronic ethanol exposure paradigms in the hippocampus consistently indicated a reduction in CB1 function, assessed via CB1 gene expression,139,141 binding,120 and WIN sensitivity,150 in most studies and in multiple rat strains.140,147 In studies where a similar methodology is used, such as in the amygdala, strong and consistent evidence identified the role of CB1 in the effects of acute alcohol exposure.11,54,55 CB1 was found to attenuate the acute ethanol-induced facilitation of GABAergic signaling in the CeA.54,55 Combined, these studies identified an important role of the eCB system in modulating CeA signaling during alcohol exposure. However, in many cases, studies and research are insufficient to draw a detailed and comprehensive consensus of the synaptic role of the eCB system within different alcohol stages and brain regions. From the review of the literature, some recurring limitations emerged from the available studies. Therefore, the following are suggested as potential and important avenues of future research to address this gap in knowledge: (1) an emphasis on the synaptic protein landscape and synaptic function related to eCB signaling and alcohol interactions; (2) a focus on brain region specificity, given that different alterations in the eCB system are observed with alcohol exposure depending on brain region; (3) more consistent alcohol administration methodologies to control for differences in the eCB system that appear to be sensitive to different alcohol administration paradigms; (4) more research on the role that eCB signaling plays in alcohol withdrawal, particularly because very few studies have addressed this in terms of synaptic function; and (5) more research to address the lack of information concerning female animals and sex-specific differences as well as age-related effects.

Understanding the underlying mechanisms of alcohol and cannabinoid interaction in the different brain regions affected by AUD is still ongoing. Elucidating the role played by the eCB system in the alterations that occur in neural signaling and synaptic function after ethanol exposure and withdrawal may provide targets for developing pharmacotherapies for AUD. Additional mechanistic and physiological studies are needed to better understand how perturbations of the brain’s eCB system may contribute to development of AUD.

Acknowledgments

This article was supported by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (grants AA027700, AA013498, P60 AA006420, AA017447, AA021491, AA015566, and T32 AA007456) as well as by the Pearson Center for Alcoholism and Addiction Research.

Figure 1 Summary schematic of endocannabinoid signaling in the synapse

A simplified description of the subcellular distribution of components of the endocannabinoid pathway is shown. Components include the major enzymes involved in regulating endocannabinoid levels (fatty acid amide hydrolase [FAAH], N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine [NAPE], NAPE-specific phospholipase D [NAPE-PLD], monoacylglycerol lipase [MAGL], and diacylglycerol lipase-alpha [DAGL-alpha]); major endocannabinoids (anandamide [AEA], 2-arachidonylglycerol [2-AG]); lipid precursors and metabolites (arachidonic acid [AA], 2-acylglycerol [AG], diacylglycerol [DAG], and ethanolamine [EtNH2]); cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1); neurotransmitter (NT); and major signaling cascade mediators downstream of CB1 activity (mitogen-activated protein kinases [MAPK], adenylate cyclase [AC], and calcium [Ca2+] signaling). Endocannabinoids signal in a retrograde manner to activate presynaptic CB1, which mediates signaling mechanisms that influence synaptic transmission and neurotransmitter release.

Table 1 Acute Ethanol Exposure and ECB System Interaction, by Brain Region and Study

Brain Region and Study	Ethanol Exposure	System	Species	Measure	Effect	Drug	Synaptic Activity	Effect	
Hippocampus									
Ferrer et al. (2007)91	4 g/kg, IP	Tissue	Wistar rats	AEA, 2-AG	Decrease				
Rubio et al. (2009);92
Rubio et al. (2007)93	24h liquid diet	Tissue	Sprague-Dawley rats	AEA, 2-AG	Decrease				
Ferrer et al. (2007)91	4 g/kg, IP	Tissue	Wistar rats	FAAH activity	Decrease				
Basavarajappa et al. (2008)94	30 and/or 60 min, 50 mM	Cultured neurons	C57BL/6J mice	AEA, 2-AG
CB1 expression
Presynaptic glutamate release	Increase
No change
Inhibition				
Amygdala									
Roberto et al. (2004);103
Roberto et al. (2004);104
Roberto et al. (2003)105	5–10 min, 44 mM	Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats	GABA transmission	Increase				
Roberto et al. (2010);54
Varodayan et al. (2016)55	5–10 min, 44 mM	Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats			WIN	Evoked and spontaneous GABA responses	Blockade	
Roberto et al. (2010);54
Varodayan et al. (2016)55	5–10 min, 44 mM	Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats			Rimonabant, AM251	Evoked and spontaneous GABAergic responses	Increase	
Kirson et al. (2018)107	10–15 min, 44 mM	Brain slice	Wistar and msP rats	Glutamatergic transmission	Decrease	WIN AM251	Evoked glutamatergic response (evoked EPSCs)	Further inhibition (males) and blockade of ethanol effect (Wistar females) with WIN
No change with AM251	
Basolateral amygdala									
Varodayan et al. (2017)115	5–10 min, 44 mM	Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats	GABAergic transmission	Increase	WIN
AM251	Spontaneous GABAergic transmission (GABA release)	Reduction with WIN
Increase with AM251	
Perra et al. (2008)116	0.25–2.0g/kg, IV	Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats			Rimonabant, WIN chronic pretreatment	Inhibition of neuronal firing by ethanol	Reduction	
Nucleus accumbens									
Ceccarini et al. (2013)120	4 g/kg, IP	Tissue	Wistar rats	AEA, CB1 binding	Increase				
Caillé et al. (2007)122	30 min self-administration	Dialysate	Wistar rats	2-AG
AEA	Increase
No change				
Hungund et al. (2003)123	1.5 g/kg, IP, 20–280 min	Dialysate	Mice	Dopamine release	Increase	CB1 knockout, Rimonabant	Dopamine release with ethanol	Inhibition	
Di Chiara et al. (1988)124	0.25–2.5 g/kg, IP	Dialysate	Sprague-Dawley rats	Dopamine release	Increase				
Ventral tegmental area									
Perra et al. (2005)17	0.5 g/kg, IV	Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats	Dopaminergic neurons firing	Increase				
Striatum									
Clarke et al. (2009)132	20 min, 20–50 mM	Brain slice	Wistar rats	eCB release	Inhibition and prevention of long-lasting neuronal disinhibition				
Cerebellum									
Kelm et al. (2007)134	5 min, 50–100 mM	Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats	Presynaptic GABA release	Increase				
Kelm et al. (2008)135	5 min, 50–100 mM	Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats			WIN	Presynaptic GABA release (sIPSCs)	Inhibition	
Note: 2-AG, 2-arachidonoylglycerol; AEA, arachidonoylethanolamide (anandamide); CB1, cannabinoid receptor 1; eCB, endocannabinoid; EPSCs, excitatory postsynaptic currents; FAAH, fatty acid amide hydrolase; GABA, gamma-aminobutyric acid; IP, intraperitoneal; IV, intravenous; sIPSCs, spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic currents; WIN, WIN 55,212-2.

Table 2 Chronic Ethanol Exposure, Withdrawal, and ECB System Interaction, by Brain Region

Brain Region and Study	Ethanol Exposure	System	Species	Measure	Effect	Drug	Synaptic Activity	Effect	
Hippocampus									
Ceccarini et al. (2013)120	7 days liquid diet (7% v/v)	Tissue	Wistar rats	CB1 binding	Reduction				
Ceccarini et al. (2013)120	7 days liquid diet (7% v/v) + 2 weeks abstinence	Tissue	Wistar rats	CB1 binding	Recovery				
Ortiz et al. (2004)141	52 days forced access	Tissue	Wistar rats	CB1 gene expression	Reduction				
Mitrirattanakul et al. (2007)139	55 days oral intubation (6 g/kg daily) + 2 days withdrawal	Tissue	Sprague-Dawley rats	CB1 gene expression, CB1 protein	Reduction				
Cippitelli et al. (2005)140	30 min daily sessions on a fixed ratio 1 schedule of reinforcement self-administration	Tissue	msP rats	CB1 gene expression	Reduction				
González et al. (2002)153	15 days liquid diet (7% v/v)	Tissue	Wistar rats	CB1 binding and gene expression	No change				
Mitrirattanakul et al. (2007)139	55 days oral intubation (6 g/kg daily) + 40 days withdrawal	Tissue	Sprague-Dawley rats	CB1 gene expression, CB1 protein, AEA, 2-AG	Increase				
Prefrontal cortex									
Cippitelli et al. (2005)140	18 days self-administration (10% v/v in 30 min daily sessions on a fixed ratio 1 schedule reinforcement)	Brain slice	msP rats (and Wistar rats)	CB1 gene expression	Reduction				
González et al. (2002)155	15 days liquid diet (7% v/v)	Tissue	Wistar rats	CB1 binding and gene expression	No change				
Pava et al. (2014)144	4 days withdrawal after 10 days chronic ethanol	Slice cultures	C57BL6/J mice			WIN	Spontaneous GABA transmission	No change	
Rimondini et al. (2002)145	7 weeks intermittent alcohol (17 h/day)	Tissue	Wistar rats	CB1 gene expression	Increase				
Rimondini et al. (2002)145	3 weeks after 7 weeks of intermittent alcohol	Tissue	Wistar rats	CB1 gene expression	Recovery				
Henricks et al. (2017)146	Acute (1–4 days) withdrawal after 6 weeks chronic intermittent alcohol vapor	Tissue	Wistar rats	2-AG	Reduction				
Amygdala									
González et al. (2002)153,155	15 days liquid diet (7% v/v)	Tissue	Wistar rats	AEA
CB1 binding and gene expression	Increase
No change				
Serrano et al. (2012)156	Withdrawal after 5 days per week for 3 weeks	Tissue	Wistar rats	CB1, MAGL gene expression	Reduction				
Serrano et al. (2018)157	30 min on a fixed ratio 1 schedule self-administration	Dialysate	Wistar dependent rats	2-AG	Decrease				
Serrano et al. (2018);157
Chevaleyre et al. (2006)158	12 h withdrawal	Dialysate	Wistar dependent rats	AEA, 2-AG	Decrease				
Varodayan et al. (2016)55	2–3 weeks CIE vapor for 14 h a day	Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats			WIN, AM251	Spontaneous GABA transmission (GABA release)	CIE blunts WIN effect	
Basolateral amygdala									
Robinson et al. (2016)164	10 days CIE vapor	Tissue; Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats	AEA
CB1	Increase
Decrease		Glutamatergic transmission	Inhibition	
Robinson et al. (2016)164						Rimonabant, AM251	Glutamatergic transmission	Reverted ethanol-induced inhibition	
Henricks et al. (2017)146	Acute (1–4 days) withdrawal after 6 weeks chronic intermittent alcohol vapor	Tissue	Wistar rats	AEA
CB1, DAGL, MAGL gene expression	Reduction
Reduction				
Varodayan et al. (2017)115	2–3 weeks CIE vapor for 14 h a day	Brain slice	Sprague-Dawley rats			WIN, AM251	Spontaneous GABA transmission	CIE reduced WIN- and AM251-mediated effect	
Ventral tegmental area									
Harlan et al. (2018)165	3 weeks withdrawal from CIE vapor	Brain slice	C57BL6/J mice	sIPSC frequency	Reduced	WIN, AM251	eCB-mediated GABAA inhibition (evoked IPSCs)	Increase	
Striatum									
Cippitelli et al., (2005);140
Ortiz et al. (2004)141	30-min daily sessions on a fixed ratio 1 schedule of reinforcement self-administration	Tissue	Wistar rats	CB1 gene expression	Decrease				
Vinod et al. (2006)136	72 h ethanol vapor (10–16 mg/l)	Tissue	Swiss Webster mice	CB1 density and activation	Decrease				
Vinod et al. (2006)136	72 h ethanol vapor (10–16 mg/l) + 24 h withdrawal	Tissue	Swiss Webster mice	CB1 density and activation	Recovery				
Vinod et al. (2012)147	70 days of two-bottle choice (24 h access/day)	Tissue	sP rats	CB1-mediated G protein coupling
eCB	Reduction
Increase	Rimonabant	CB1-mediated G protein coupling	Reversed	
DePoy et al. (2013)167	2 weeks intermittent ethanol (16 h/day for 4 days per week)	Brain slice	C57BL6/J mice	2-AG	Increase		CB1-mediated long-term depression	Abolition	
Cerebellum									
Vinod et al. (2006)136	72 h ethanol vapor (10–16 mg/l)	Tissue	Swiss Webster mice	CB1 density and activation	Decrease				
Vinod et al. (2006)136	72 h ethanol vapor (10–16 mg/l) + 24 h withdrawal	Tissue	Swiss Webster mice	CB1 density and activation	Recovery				
Basavarajappa et al. (1999);138
Basavarajappa et al. (2000)168	72 h ethanol (100 mM)	Cultured cerebellar granular primary neurons and SK-N-SH (human cell line)	Sprague-Dawley rats	AEA, 2-AG synthesis	Increase	Rimonabant	Ethanol induced 2-AG synthesis	Inhibited	
Basavarajappa et al. (1999);138
Basavarajappa et al. (2000)168	72 h ethanol (100–150 mM)	Cultured cerebellar granular primary neurons and SK-N-SH (human cell line)	Sprague-Dawley rats	NAPE-PLD activity	Increase				
Basavarajappa et al. (2003)171	72 h ethanol (100–150 mM)	Cultured cerebellar granular primary neurons	Sprague-Dawley rats	AEA transport
FAAH activity	Decrease
Decrease	Rimonabant	AEA transport	No change	
Note: 2-AG, 2-arachidonoylglycerol; AEA, arachidonoylethanolamide (anandamide); CB1, cannabinoid receptor 1; CIE, chronic intermittent ethanol; FAAH, fatty acid amide hydrolase; GABA, gamma-aminobutyric acid; GABAA, gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor; MAGL, monoacylglycerol lipase; NAPE-PLD, N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine–specific phospholipase D; sIPSC, spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic current; WIN, WIN 55,212-2.

Disclosures

Dr. Roberto is Neuropharmacology senior section editor. The authors declare no competing financial or nonfinancial interests.

Publisher’s Note

Opinions expressed in contributed articles do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health. The U.S. government does not endorse or favor any specific commercial product or commodity. Any trade or proprietary names appearing in Alcohol Research: Current Reviews are used only because they are considered essential in the context of the studies reported herein.
==== Refs
References

1 Baggio S Sapin M Khazaal Y Studer J Wolff H Gmel G Comorbidity of symptoms of alcohol and cannabis use disorders among a population-based sample of simultaneous users. Insight from a network perspective Int J Environ Res Public Health 2018 15 12 2893 10.3390/ijerph15122893 30562994
2 Iversen L Cannabis and the brain Brain 2003 126 Pt 6 1252 1270 10.1093/brain/awg143 12764049
3 Metrik J Gunn RL Jackson KM Sokolovsky AW Borsari B Daily patterns of marijuana and alcohol co-use among individuals with alcohol and cannabis use disorders Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2018 42 6 1096 1104 10.1111/acer.13639 29656401
4 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 2018 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Women Rockville, MD U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2020 https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/reports/rpt23250/5_Women_2020_01_14.pdf
5 Chung T Harris RA Cannabis and alcohol: From basic science to public policy Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2019 43 9 1829 1833 10.1111/acer.14144 31265135
6 Kleczkowska P Smaga I Filip M Bujalska-Zadrozny M Cannabinoid ligands and alcohol addiction: A promising therapeutic tool or a humbug? Neurotox Res 2016 29 1 173 196 10.1007/s12640-015-9555-7 26353844
7 Risso C Boniface S Subbaraman MS Englund A Does cannabis complement or substitute alcohol consumption? A systematic review of human and animal studies J Psychopharmacol 2020 34 9 938 954 10.1177/0269881120919970 32648806
8 Lucas P Baron EP Jikomes N Medical cannabis patterns of use and substitution for opioids & other pharmaceutical drugs, alcohol, tobacco, and illicit substances; Results from a cross-sectional survey of authorized patients Harm Reduct J 2019 16 1 9 10.1186/s12954-019-0278-6 30691503
9 Subbaraman MS Can cannabis be considered a substitute medication for alcohol? Alcohol Alcohol 2014 49 3 292 298 10.1093/alcalc/agt182 24402247
10 Mechoulam R Parker L Cannabis and alcohol—a close friendship Trends Pharmacol Sci 2003 24 6 266 268 10.1016/s0165-6147(03)00107-x 12823949
11 Cruz MT Bajo M Schweitzer P Roberto M Shared mechanisms of alcohol and other drugs Alcohol Res Health 2008 31 2 137 147 23584815
12 González S Fernández-Ruiz J Di Marzo V Behavioral and molecular changes elicited by acute administration of SR141716 to Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol-tolerant rats: An experimental model of cannabinoid abstinence Drug Alcohol Depend 2004 74 2 159 170 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2003.12.011 15099659
13 Basavarajappa BS Hungund BL Neuromodulatory role of the endocannabinoid signaling system in alcoholism: An overview Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2002 66 2–3 287 299 10.1054/plef.2001.0352 12052043
14 Vinod KY Hungund BL Endocannabinoid lipids and mediated system: Implications for alcoholism and neuropsychiatric disorders Life Sci 2005 77 14 1569 1583 10.1016/j.lfs.2005.05.041 16005471
15 Freedland CS Sharpe AL Samson HH Porrino LJ Effects of SR141716A on ethanol and sucrose self-administration Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2001 25 2 277 282 11236843
16 De Vries TJ Schoffelmeer AN Cannabinoid CB1 receptors control conditioned drug seeking Trends Pharmacol Sci 2005 26 8 420 426 10.1016/j.tips.2005.06.002 15992935
17 Perra S Pillolla G Melis M Muntoni AL Gessa GL Pistis M Involvement of the endogenous cannabinoid system in the effects of alcohol in the mesolimbic reward circuit: Electrophysiological evidence in vivo Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2005 183 3 368 377 10.1007/s00213-005-0195-0 16228194
18 Pava MJ Woodward JJ A review of the interactions between alcohol and the endocannabinoid system: Implications for alcohol dependence and future directions for research Alcohol 2012 46 3 185 204 10.1016/j.alcohol.2012.01.002 22459871
19 Basavarajappa BS Joshi V Shivakumar M Subbanna S Distinct functions of endogenous cannabinoid system in alcohol abuse disorders Br J Pharmacol 2019 176 17 3085 3109 10.1111/bph.14780 31265740
20 Kunos G Interactions between alcohol and the endocannabinoid system Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2020 44 4 790 805 10.1111/acer.14306 32056226
21 Devane WA Dysarz FA 3rd Johnson MR Melvin LS Howlett AC Determination and characterization of a cannabinoid receptor in rat brain Mol Pharmacol 1988 34 5 605 613 2848184
22 Howlett AC Bidaut-Russell M Devane WA Melvin LS Johnson MR Herkenham M The cannabinoid receptor: biochemical, anatomical and behavioral characterization Trends Neurosci 1990 13 10 420 423 10.1016/0166-2236(90)90124-s 1700516
23 Brenneisen R Chemistry and analysis of phytocannabinoids and other cannabis constituents ElSohly MA Marijuana and the Cannabinoids. Forensic Science and Medicine Totowa, NJ Humana Press 2007 17 49 10.1007/978-1-59259-947-9_2
24 Matsuda LA Lolait SJ Brownstein MJ Young AC Bonner TI Structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functional expression of the cloned cDNA Nature 1990 346 6284 561 564 10.1038/346561a0 2165569
25 Munro S Thomas KL Abu-Shaar M Molecular characterization of a peripheral receptor for cannabinoids Nature 1993 365 6441 61 65 10.1038/365061a0 7689702
26 Onaivi ES Ishiguro H Gu S Liu QR CNS effects of CB2 cannabinoid receptors: Beyond neuro-immuno-cannabinoid activity J Psychopharmacol 2012 26 1 92 103 10.1177/0269881111400652 21447538
27 Van Sickle MD Duncan M Kingsley PJ Identification and functional characterization of brainstem cannabinoid CB2 receptors Science 2005 310 5746 329 332 10.1126/science.1115740 16224028
28 Freund TF Katona I Piomelli D Role of endogenous cannabinoids in synaptic signaling Physiol Rev 2003 83 3 1017 1066 10.1152/physrev.00004.2003 12843414
29 Lu Y Anderson HD Cannabinoid signaling in health and disease Can J Physiol Pharmacol 2017 95 4 311 327 10.1139/cjpp-2016-0346 28263083
30 Buckley NE McCoy KL Mezey E Immunomodulation by cannabinoids is absent in mice deficient for the cannabinoid CB(2) receptor Eur J Pharmacol 2000 396 2–3 141 149 10.1016/s0014-2999(00)00211-9 10822068
31 Zhang HY Gao M Shen H Expression of functional cannabinoid CB2 receptor in VTA dopamine neurons in rats Addict Biol 2017 22 3 752 765 10.1111/adb.12367 26833913
32 Basavarajappa BS Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder: Potential role of endocannabinoids signaling Brain Sci 2015 5 4 456 493 10.3390/brainsci5040456 26529026
33 Devane WA Hanus L Breuer A Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds to the cannabinoid receptor Science 1992 258 5090 1946 1949 10.1126/science.1470919 1470919
34 Piomelli D The molecular logic of endocannabinoid signalling Nat Rev Neurosci 2003 4 11 873 884 10.1038/nrn1247 14595399
35 Mechoulam R Ben-Shabat S Hanus L Identification of an endogenous 2-monoglyceride, present in canine gut, that binds to cannabinoid receptors Biochem Pharmacol 1995 50 1 83 90 10.1016/0006-2952(95)00109-d 7605349
36 Sugiura T Kondo S Sukagawa A 2-Arachidonoylglycerol: A possible endogenous cannabinoid receptor ligand in brain Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1995 215 1 89 97 10.1006/bbrc.1995.2437 7575630
37 Hillard CJ Biochemistry and pharmacology of the endocannabinoids arachidonylethanolamide and 2-arachidonylglycerol Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat 2000 61 1–2 3 18 10.1016/s0090-6980(00)00051-4 10785538
38 Irving A Abdulrazzaq G Chan SLF Penman J Harvey J Alexander SPH Cannabinoid receptor-related orphan G protein-coupled receptors Adv Pharmacol 2017 80 223 247 10.1016/bs.apha.2017.04.004 28826536
39 Iannotti FA Di Marzo V Petrosino S Endocannabinoids and endocannabinoid-related mediators: Targets, metabolism and role in neurological disorders Prog Lipid Res 2016 62 107 128 10.1016/j.plipres.2016.02.002 26965148
40 Pistis M Melis M From surface to nuclear receptors: The endocannabinoid family extends its assets Curr Med Chem 2010 17 14 1450 1467 10.2174/092986710790980014 20166922
41 Basavarajappa BS Shivakumar M Joshi V Subbanna S Endocannabinoid system in neurodegenerative disorders J Neurochem 2017 142 5 624 648 10.1111/jnc.14098 28608560
42 Hussain Z Uyama T Tsuboi K Ueda N Mammalian enzymes responsible for the biosynthesis of N-acylethanolamines Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids 2017 1862 12 1546 1561 10.1016/j.bbalip.2017.08.006 28843504
43 Cravatt BF Giang DK Mayfield SP Boger DL Lerner RA Gilula NB Molecular characterization of an enzyme that degrades neuromodulatory fatty-acid amides Nature 1996 384 6604 83 87 10.1038/384083a0 8900284
44 Bisogno T Howell F Williams G Cloning of the first sn1-DAG lipases points to the spatial and temporal regulation of endocannabinoid signaling in the brain J Cell Biol 2003 163 3 463 468 10.1083/jcb.200305129 14610053
45 Labar G Wouters J Lambert DM A review on the monoacylglycerol lipase: At the interface between fat and endocannabinoid signalling Curr Med Chem 2010 17 24 2588 2607 10.2174/092986710791859414 20491633
46 Blankman JL Simon GM Cravatt BF A comprehensive profile of brain enzymes that hydrolyze the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol Chem Biol 2007 14 12 1347 1356 10.1016/j.chembiol.2007.11.006 18096503
47 Kreitzer AC Regehr WG Cerebellar depolarization-induced suppression of inhibition is mediated by endogenous cannabinoids J Neurosci 2001 21 20 RC174 10.1523/jneurosci.21-20-j0005.2001 11588204
48 Wilson RI Kunos G Nicoll RA Presynaptic specificity of endocannabinoid signaling in the hippocampus Neuron 2001 31 3 453 462 10.1016/s0896-6273(01)00372-5 11516401
49 Yoshida T Hashimoto K Zimmer A Maejima T Araishi K Kano M The cannabinoid CB1 receptor mediates retrograde signals for depolarization-induced suppression of inhibition in cerebellar Purkinje cells J Neurosci 2002 22 5 1690 1697 10.1523/jneurosci.22-05-01690.2002 11880498
50 Kreitzer AC Regehr WG Retrograde inhibition of presynaptic calcium influx by endogenous cannabinoids at excitatory synapses onto Purkinje cells Neuron 2001 29 3 717 727 10.1016/s0896-6273(01)00246-x 11301030
51 Gerdeman G Lovinger DM CB1 cannabinoid receptor inhibits synaptic release of glutamate in rat dorsolateral striatum J Neurophysiol 2001 85 1 468 471 10.1152/jn.2001.85.1.468 11152748
52 Szabo B Dorner L Pfreundtner C Norenberg W Starke K Inhibition of GABAergic inhibitory postsynaptic currents by cannabinoids in rat corpus striatum Neuroscience 1998 85 2 395 403 10.1016/s0306-4522(97)00597-6 9622239
53 Katona I Sperlagh B Sik A Presynaptically located CB1 cannabinoid receptors regulate GABA release from axon terminals of specific hippocampal interneurons J Neurosci 1999 19 11 4544 4558 10.1523/jneurosci.19-11-04544.1999 10341254
54 Roberto M Cruz M Bajo M Siggins GR Parsons LH Schweitzer P The endocannabinoid system tonically regulates inhibitory transmission and depresses the effect of ethanol in central amygdala Neuropsychopharmacology 2010 35 9 1962 1972 10.1038/npp.2010.70 20463657
55 Varodayan FP Soni N Bajo M Chronic ethanol exposure decreases CB1 receptor function at GABAergic synapses in the rat central amygdala Addict Biol 2016 21 4 788 801 10.1111/adb.12256 25940135
56 Rodríguez JJ Mackie K Pickel VM Ultrastructural localization of the CB1 cannabinoid receptor in mu-opioid receptor patches of the rat caudate putamen nucleus J Neurosci 2001 21 3 823 833 10.1523/jneurosci.21-03-00823.2001 11157068
57 Varma N Carlson GC Ledent C Alger BE Metabotropic glutamate receptors drive the endocannabinoid system in hippocampus J Neurosci 2001 21 24 RC188 10.1523/jneurosci.21-24-j0003.2001 11734603
58 Ohno-Shosaku T Hashimotodani Y Ano M Takeda S Tsubokawa H Kano M Endocannabinoid signalling triggered by NMDA receptor-mediated calcium entry into rat hippocampal neurons J Physiol 2007 584 Pt 2 407 418 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.137505 17615096
59 Stella N Piomelli D Receptor-dependent formation of endogenous cannabinoids in cortical neurons Eur J Pharmacol 2001 425 3 189 196 10.1016/s0014-2999(01)01182-7 11513837
60 Mackie K Lai Y Westenbroek R Mitchell R Cannabinoids activate an inwardly rectifying potassium conductance and inhibit Q-type calcium currents in AtT20 cells transfected with rat brain cannabinoid receptor J Neurosci 1995 15 10 6552 6561 10.1523/jneurosci.15-10-06552.1995 7472417
61 Azad SC Eder M Marsicano G Lutz B Zieglgänsberger W Rammes G Activation of the cannabinoid receptor type 1 decreases glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic transmission in the lateral amygdala of the mouse Learn Mem 2003 10 2 116 128 10.1101/lm.53303 12663750
62 Daniel H Rancillac A Crepel F Mechanisms underlying cannabinoid inhibition of presynaptic Ca2+ influx at parallel fibre synapses of the rat cerebellum J Physiol 2004 557 Pt 1 159 174 10.1113/jphysiol.2004.063263 15034129
63 Schweitzer P Cannabinoids decrease the K+ M-current in hippocampal CA1 neurons J Neurosci 2000 20 1 51 58 10.1523/jneurosci.20-01-00051.2000 10627580
64 Moore SD Madamba SG Siggins GR Ethanol diminishes a voltage-dependent K+ current, the M-current, in CA1 hippocampal pyramidal neurons in vitro Brain Res 1990 516 2 222 228 10.1016/0006-8993(90)90922-x 1973065
65 Chevaleyre V Heifets BD Kaeser PS Südhof TC Castillo PE Endocannabinoid-mediated long-term plasticity requires cAMP/PKA signaling and RIM1alpha Neuron 2007 54 5 801 812 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.05.020 17553427
66 Chevaleyre V Castillo PE Heterosynaptic LTD of hippocampal GABAergic synapses: A novel role of endocannabinoids in regulating excitability Neuron 2003 38 3 461 472 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00235-6 12741992
67 Castillo PE Younts TJ Chavez AE Hashimotodani Y Endocannabinoid signaling and synaptic function Neuron 2012 76 1 70 81 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.09.020 23040807
68 Stempel AV Stumpf A Zhang HY Cannabinoid type 2 receptors mediate a cell type-specific plasticity in the hippocampus Neuron 2016 90 4 795 809 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.03.034 27133464
69 Friedman E Gershon S Effect of delta8-THC on alcohol-induced sleeping time in the rat Psychopharmacologia 1974 39 3 193 198 10.1007/bf00421026 4427987
70 Marks DF MacAvoy MG Divided attention performance in cannabis users and non-users following alcohol and cannabis separately and in combination Psychopharmacology (Berl) 1989 99 3 397 401 10.1007/bf00445566 2594907
71 da Silva GE Morato GS Takahashi RN Rapid tolerance to Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cross-tolerance between ethanol and Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in mice Eur J Pharmacol 2001 431 2 201 207 10.1016/s0014-2999(01)01449-2 11728426
72 Lemos JI Takahashi RN Morato GS Effects of SR141716 and WIN 55,212-2 on tolerance to ethanol in rats using the acute and rapid procedures Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2007 194 2 139 149 10.1007/s00213-007-0804-1 17546513
73 Henderson-Redmond AN Guindon J Morgan DJ Roles for the endocannabinoid system in ethanol-motivated behavior Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2016 65 330 339 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.06.011 26123153
74 Arnone M Maruani J Chaperon F Selective inhibition of sucrose and ethanol intake by SR 141716, an antagonist of central cannabinoid (CB1) receptors Psychopharmacology (Berl) 1997 132 1 104 106 10.1007/s002130050326 9272766
75 Colombo G Agabio R Fà M Reduction of voluntary ethanol intake in ethanol-preferring sP rats by the cannabinoid antagonist SR-141716 Alcohol Alcohol 1998 33 2 126 130 10.1093/oxfordjournals.alcalc.a008368 9566474
76 Femenia T García-Gutiérrez MS Manzanares J CB1 receptor blockade decreases ethanol intake and associated neurochemical changes in fawn-hooded rats Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2010 34 1 131 141 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.01074.x 19860799
77 Gallate JE McGregor IS The motivation for beer in rats: Effects of ritanserin, naloxone and SR 141716 Psychopharmacology (Berl) 1999 142 3 302 308 10.1007/s002130050893 10208323
78 Lallemand F De Witte P SR147778, a CB1 cannabinoid receptor antagonist, suppresses ethanol preference in chronically alcoholized Wistar rats Alcohol 2006 39 3 125 134 10.1016/j.alcohol.2006.08.001 17127132
79 Vinod KY Yalamanchili R Thanos PK Genetic and pharmacological manipulations of the CB1 receptor alter ethanol preference and dependence in ethanol preferring and nonpreferring mice Synapse 2008 62 8 574 581 10.1002/syn.20533 18509854
80 Gallate JE Saharov T Mallet PE McGregor IS Increased motivation for beer in rats following administration of a cannabinoid CB1 receptor agonist Eur J Pharmacol 1999 370 3 233 240 10.1016/s0014-2999(99)00170-3 10334497
81 Kelaï S Hanoun N Aufrère G Beaugè F Hamon M Lanfumey L Cannabinoid-serotonin interactions in alcohol-preferring vs. alcohol-avoiding mice J Neurochem 2006 99 1 308 320 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.04054.x 16987253
82 Martín-Sánchez A Warnault V Montagud-Romero S Alcohol-induced conditioned place preference is modulated by CB2 cannabinoid receptors and modifies levels of endocannabinoids in the mesocorticolimbic system Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2019 183 22 31 10.1016/j.pbb.2019.06.007 31220547
83 Hungund BL Basavarajappa BS Vadasz C Ethanol, endocannabinoids, and the cannabinoidergic signaling system Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2002 26 4 565 574 11981134
84 Hansson AC Bermúdez-Silva FJ Malinen H Genetic impairment of frontocortical endocannabinoid degradation and high alcohol preference Neuropsychopharmacology 2007 32 1 117 126 10.1038/sj.npp.1301034 16482090
85 Zhou Y Schwartz BI Giza J Gross SS Lee FS Kreek MJ Blockade of alcohol escalation and “relapse” drinking by pharmacological FAAH inhibition in male and female C57BL/6J mice Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2017 234 19 2955 2970 10.1007/s00213-017-4691-9 28730283
86 Cippitelli A Bilbao A Gorriti MA The anandamide transport inhibitor AM404 reduces ethanol self-administration Eur J Neurosci 2007 26 2 476 486 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2007.05665.x 17650118
87 Soria-Gomez E Pagano Zottola AC Mariani Y Subcellular specificity of cannabinoid effects in striatonigral circuits Neuron 2021 109 9 1513 1526.E11 10.1016/j.neuron.2021.03.007 33770505
88 Lovinger DM Roberto M Synaptic effects induced by alcohol Curr Top Behav Neurosci 2013 13 31 86 10.1007/7854_2011_143 21786203
89 Cui C Koob GF Titrating tipsy targets: The neurobiology of low-dose alcohol Trends Pharmacol Sci 2017 38 6 556 568 10.1016/j.tips.2017.03.002 28372826
90 Staples MC Mandyam CD Thinking after drinking: Impaired hippocampal-dependent cognition in human alcoholics and animal models of alcohol dependence Front Psychiatry 2016 7 162 10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00162 27746746
91 Ferrer B Bermúdez-Silva FJ Bilbao A Regulation of brain anandamide by acute administration of ethanol Biochem J 2007 404 1 97 104 10.1042/bj20061898 17302558
92 Rubio M de Miguel R Fernández-Ruiz J Gutierrez-Lopez D Carai MA Ramos JA Effects of a short-term exposure to alcohol in rats on FAAH enzyme and CB1 receptor in different brain areas Drug Alcohol Depend 2009 99 1–3 354 358 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2008.08.004 18922654
93 Rubio M McHugh D Fernández-Ruiz J Bradshaw H Walker JM Short-term exposure to alcohol in rats affects brain levels of anandamide, other N-acylethanolamines and 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol Neurosci Lett 2007 421 3 270 274 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.05.052 17574742
94 Basavarajappa BS Ninan I Arancio O Acute ethanol suppresses glutamatergic neurotransmission through endocannabinoids in hippocampal neurons J Neurochem 2008 107 4 1001 1013 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05685.x 18796007
95 Shen M Piser TM Seybold VS Thayer SA Cannabinoid receptor agonists inhibit glutamatergic synaptic transmission in rat hippocampal cultures J Neurosci 1996 16 14 4322 4334 10.1523/jneurosci.16-14-04322.1996 8699243
96 Mackie K Hille B Cannabinoids inhibit N-type calcium channels in neuroblastoma-glioma cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992 89 9 3825 3829 10.1073/pnas.89.9.3825 1315042
97 Twitchell W Brown S Mackie K Cannabinoids inhibit N- and P/Q-type calcium channels in cultured rat hippocampal neurons J Neurophysiol 1997 78 1 43 50 10.1152/jn.1997.78.1.43 9242259
98 Johnston JB Further contributions to the study of the evolution of the forebrain. V. Survey of forebrain morphology J Comp Neurol 1923 36 2 143 192 10.1002/cne.900360205
99 Heimer L Alheid GF Piecing together the puzzle of basal forebrain anatomy Adv Exp Med Biol 1991 295 1 42 10.1007/978-1-4757-0145-6_1
100 Koob GF Le Moal M Plasticity of reward neurocircuitry and the ‘dark side’ of drug addiction Nat Neurosci 2005 8 11 1442 1444 10.1038/nn1105-1442 16251985
101 Roberto M Kirson D Khom S The role of the central amygdala in alcohol dependence Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2021 11 2 a039339 10.1101/cshperspect.a039339 31988201
102 Koob GF Drug addiction: Hyperkatifeia/negative reinforcement as a framework for medications development Pharmacol Rev 2021 73 1 163 201 10.1124/pharmrev.120.000083 33318153
103 Roberto M Schweitzer P Madamba SG Stouffer DG Parsons LH Siggins GR Acute and chronic ethanol alter glutamatergic transmission in rat central amygdala: An in vitro and in vivo analysis J Neurosci 2004 24 7 1594 1603 10.1523/jneurosci.5077-03.2004 14973247
104 Roberto M Madamba SG Stouffer DG Parsons LH Siggins GR Increased GABA release in the central amygdala of ethanol-dependent rats J Neurosci 2004 24 45 10159 10166 10.1523/jneurosci.3004-04.2004 15537886
105 Roberto M Madamba SG Moore SD Tallent MK Siggins GR Ethanol increases GABAergic transmission at both pre- and postsynaptic sites in rat central amygdala neurons Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 100 4 2053 2058 10.1073/pnas.0437926100 12566570
106 Ramikie TS Nyilas R Bluett RJ Multiple mechanistically distinct modes of endocannabinoid mobilization at central amygdala glutamatergic synapses Neuron 2014 81 5 1111 1125 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.01.012 24607231
107 Kirson D Oleata CS Parsons LH Ciccocioppo R Roberto M CB1 and ethanol effects on glutamatergic transmission in the central amygdala of male and female msP and Wistar rats Addict Biol 2018 23 2 676 688 10.1111/adb.12525 28656627
108 Serrano A Parsons LH Endocannabinoid influence in drug reinforcement, dependence and addiction-related behaviors Pharmacol Ther 2011 132 3 215 241 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2011.06.005 21798285
109 Morena M Patel S Bains JS Hill MN Neurobiological interactions between stress and the endocannabinoid system Neuropsychopharmacology 2016 41 1 80 102 10.1038/npp.2015.166 26068727
110 Katona I Rancz EA Acsády L Distribution of CB1 cannabinoid receptors in the amygdala and their role in the control of GABAergic transmission J Neurosci 2001 21 23 9506 9518 10.1523/jneurosci.21-23-09506.2001 11717385
111 Yoshida T Uchigashima M Yamasaki M Unique inhibitory synapse with particularly rich endocannabinoid signaling machinery on pyramidal neurons in basal amygdaloid nucleus Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 108 7 3059 3064 10.1073/pnas.1012875108 21282604
112 Marsicano G Wotjak CT Azad SC The endogenous cannabinoid system controls extinction of aversive memories Nature 2002 418 6897 530 534 10.1038/nature00839 12152079
113 Azad SC Monory K Marsicano G Circuitry for associative plasticity in the amygdala involves endocannabinoid signaling J Neurosci 2004 24 44 9953 9961 10.1523/jneurosci.2134-04.2004 15525780
114 Zhu PJ Lovinger DM Retrograde endocannabinoid signaling in a postsynaptic neuron/synaptic bouton preparation from basolateral amygdala J Neurosci 2005 25 26 6199 6207 10.1523/jneurosci.1148-05.2005 15987949
115 Varodayan FP Bajo M Soni N Chronic alcohol exposure disrupts CB1 regulation of GABAergic transmission in the rat basolateral amygdala Addict Biol 2017 22 3 766 778 10.1111/adb.12369 26786379
116 Perra S Pillolla G Luchicchi A Pistis M Alcohol inhibits spontaneous activity of basolateral amygdala projection neurons in the rat: Involvement of the endocannabinoid system Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2008 32 3 443 449 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.00588.x 18215217
117 Talani G Lovinger DM Interactions between ethanol and the endocannabinoid system at GABAergic synapses on basolateral amygdala principal neurons Alcohol 2015 49 8 781 794 10.1016/j.alcohol.2015.08.006 26603632
118 Roberto M Varodayan FP Synaptic targets: Chronic alcohol actions Neuropharmacology 2017 122 85 99 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.01.013 28108359
119 Xu L Nan J Lan Y The nucleus accumbens: A common target in the comorbidity of depression and addiction Front Neural Circuits 2020 14 37 10.3389/fncir.2020.00037 32694984
120 Ceccarini J Casteels C Koole M Bormans G Van Laere K Transient changes in the endocannabinoid system after acute and chronic ethanol exposure and abstinence in the rat: A combined PET and microdialysis study Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2013 40 10 1582 1594 10.1007/s00259-013-2456-1 23740372
121 Subbanna S Shivakumar M Psychoyos D Xie S Basavarajappa BS Anandamide-CB1 receptor signaling contributes to postnatal ethanol-induced neonatal neurodegeneration, adult synaptic, and memory deficits J Neurosci 2013 33 15 6350 6366 10.1523/jneurosci.3786-12.2013 23575834
122 Caillé S Alvarez-Jaimes L Polis I Stouffer DG Parsons LH Specific alterations of extracellular endocannabinoid levels in the nucleus accumbens by ethanol, heroin, and cocaine self-administration J Neurosci 2007 27 14 3695 3702 17409233
123 Hungund BL Szakall I Adam A Basavarajappa BS Vadasz C Cannabinoid CB1 receptor knockout mice exhibit markedly reduced voluntary alcohol consumption and lack alcohol-induced dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens J Neurochem 2003 84 4 698 704 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.01576.x 12562514
124 Di Chiara G Imperato A Drugs abused by humans preferentially increase synaptic dopamine concentrations in the mesolimbic system of freely moving rats Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988 85 14 5274 5278 10.1073/pnas.85.14.5274 2899326
125 Bustamante D Quintanilla ME Tampier L Gonzalez-Lira V Israel Y Herrera-Marschitz M Ethanol induces stronger dopamine release in nucleus accumbens (shell) of alcohol-preferring (bibulous) than in alcohol-avoiding (abstainer) rats Eur J Pharmacol 2008 591 1–3 153 158 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.06.069 18611399
126 Tanda G Pontieri FE Di Chiara G Cannabinoid and heroin activation of mesolimbic dopamine transmission by a common mu1 opioid receptor mechanism Science 1997 276 5321 2048 2050 10.1126/science.276.5321.2048 9197269
127 Gessa GL Melis M Muntoni AL Diana M Cannabinoids activate mesolimbic dopamine neurons by an action on cannabinoid CB1 receptors Eur J Pharmacol 1998 341 1 39 44 10.1016/s0014-2999(97)01442-8 9489854
128 Cheer JF Wassum KM Heien ML Phillips PE Wightman RM Cannabinoids enhance subsecond dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens of awake rats J Neurosci 2004 24 18 4393 4400 10.1523/jneurosci.0529-04.2004 15128853
129 Lupica CR Riegel AC Hoffman AF Marijuana and cannabinoid regulation of brain reward circuits Br J Pharmacol 2004 143 2 227 234 10.1038/sj.bjp.0705931 15313883
130 Mateo Y Johnson KA Covey DP Endocannabinoid actions on cortical terminals orchestrate local modulation of dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens Neuron 2017 96 5 1112 1126.e5 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.11.012 29216450
131 You C Vandegrift B Brodie MS Ethanol actions on the ventral tegmental area: Novel potential targets on reward pathway neurons Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2018 235 6 1711 1726 10.1007/s00213-018-4875-y 29549390
132 Clarke RB Adermark L Acute ethanol treatment prevents endocannabinoid-mediated long-lasting disinhibition of striatal output Neuropharmacology 2010 58 4–5 799 805 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2009.12.006 20026138
133 Valenzuela CF Jotty K Mini-review: Effects of ethanol on GABAA receptor-mediated neurotransmission in the cerebellar cortex—recent advances Cerebellum 2015 14 4 438 446 10.1007/s12311-014-0639-3 25575727
134 Kelm MK Criswell HE Breese GR Calcium release from presynaptic internal stores is required for ethanol to increase spontaneous gamma-aminobutyric acid release onto cerebellum Purkinje neurons J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2007 323 1 356 364 10.1124/jpet.107.126144 17652632
135 Kelm MK Criswell HE Breese GR The role of protein kinase A in the ethanol-induced increase in spontaneous GABA release onto cerebellar Purkinje neurons J Neurophysiol 2008 100 6 3417 3428 10.1152/jn.90970.2008 18945815
136 Vinod KY Yalamanchili R Xie S Cooper TB Hungund BL Effect of chronic ethanol exposure and its withdrawal on the endocannabinoid system Neurochem Int 2006 49 6 619 625 10.1016/j.neuint.2006.05.002 16822589
137 Ceccarini J Hompes T Verhaeghen A Changes in cerebral CB1 receptor availability after acute and chronic alcohol abuse and monitored abstinence J Neurosci 2014 34 8 2822 2831 10.1523/jneurosci.0849-13.2014 24553924
138 Basavarajappa BS Hungund BL Chronic ethanol increases the cannabinoid receptor agonist anandamide and its precursor N-arachidonoylphosphatidylethanolamine in SK-N-SH cells J Neurochem 1999 72 2 522 528 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1999.0720522.x 9930723
139 Mitrirattanakul S López-Valdés HE Liang J Bidirectional alterations of hippocampal cannabinoid 1 receptors and their endogenous ligands in a rat model of alcohol withdrawal and dependence Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2007 31 5 855 867 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.00366.x 17386072
140 Cippitelli A Bilbao A Hansson AC Cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonism reduces conditioned reinstatement of ethanol-seeking behavior in rats Eur J Neurosci 2005 21 8 2243 2251 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04056.x 15869521
141 Ortiz S Oliva JM Pérez-Rial S Palomo T Manzanares J Chronic ethanol consumption regulates cannabinoid CB1 receptor gene expression in selected regions of rat brain Alcohol Alcohol 2004 39 2 88 92 10.1093/alcalc/agh036 14998822
142 Natividad LA Buczynski MW Herman MA Constitutive increases in amygdalar corticotropin-releasing factor and fatty acid amide hydrolase drive an anxious phenotype Biol Psychiatry 2017 82 7 500 510 10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.01.005 28209423
143 Hirvonen J Zanotti-Fregonara P Umhau JC Reduced cannabinoid CB1 receptor binding in alcohol dependence measured with positron emission tomography Mol Psychiatry 2013 18 8 916 921 10.1038/mp.2012.100 22776901
144 Pava MJ Woodward JJ Chronic ethanol alters network activity and endocannabinoid signaling in the prefrontal cortex Front Integr Neurosci 2014 8 58 10.3389/fnint.2014.00058 25100953
145 Rimondini R Arlinde C Sommer W Heilig M Long-lasting increase in voluntary ethanol consumption and transcriptional regulation in the rat brain after intermittent exposure to alcohol FASEB J 2002 16 1 27 35 10.1096/fj.01-0593com 11772933
146 Henricks AM Berger AL Lugo JM Sex- and hormone-dependent alterations in alcohol withdrawal-induced anxiety and corticolimbic endocannabinoid signaling Neuropharmacology 2017 124 121 133 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.05.023 28554848
147 Vinod KY Maccioni P Garcia-Gutierrez MS Innate difference in the endocannabinoid signaling and its modulation by alcohol consumption in alcohol-preferring sP rats Addict Biol 2012 17 1 62 75 10.1111/j.1369-1600.2010.00299.x 21309960
148 Roberto M Nelson TE Ur CL Gruol DL Long-term potentiation in the rat hippocampus is reversibly depressed by chronic intermittent ethanol exposure J Neurophysiol 2002 87 5 2385 2397 10.1152/jn.2002.87.5.2385 11976376
149 Roberto M Nelson TE Ur CL Brunelli M Sanna PP Gruol DL The transient depression of hippocampal CA1 LTP induced by chronic intermittent ethanol exposure is associated with an inhibition of the MAP kinase pathway Eur J Neurosci 2003 17 8 1646 1654 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02614.x 12752382
150 Moranta D Esteban S García-Sevilla JA Ethanol desensitizes cannabinoid CB1 receptors modulating monoamine synthesis in the rat brain in vivo Neurosci Lett 2006 392 1–2 58 61 10.1016/j.neulet.2005.08.061 16183202
151 Warnault V Houchi H Barbier E The lack of CB1 receptors prevents neuroadapatations of both NMDA and GABAA receptors after chronic ethanol exposure J Neurochem 2007 102 3 741 752 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04577.x 17442049
152 Fu R Tang Y Li W Endocannabinoid signaling in the lateral habenula regulates pain and alcohol consumption Transl Psychiatry 2021 11 1 220 10.1038/s41398-021-01337-3 33854035
153 González S Fernández-Ruiz J Sparpaglione V Parolaro D Ramos JA Chronic exposure to morphine, cocaine or ethanol in rats produced different effects in brain cannabinoid CB1 receptor binding and mRNA levels Drug Alcohol Depend 2002 66 1 77 84 10.1016/s0376-8716(01)00186-7 11850139
154 Abernathy K Chandler LJ Woodward JJ Alcohol and the prefrontal cortex Int Rev Neurobiol 2010 91 289 320 10.1016/S0074-7742(10)91009-X 20813246
155 González S Cascio MG Fernández-Ruiz J Fezza F Di Marzo V Ramos JA Changes in endocannabinoid contents in the brain of rats chronically exposed to nicotine, ethanol or cocaine Brain Res 2002 954 1 73 81 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03344-9 12393235
156 Serrano A Rivera P Pavon FJ Differential effects of single versus repeated alcohol withdrawal on the expression of endocannabinoid system-related genes in the rat amygdala Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2012 36 6 984 994 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2011.01686.x 22141465
157 Serrano A Pavon FJ Buczynski MW Deficient endocannabinoid signaling in the central amygdala contributes to alcohol dependence-related anxiety-like behavior and excessive alcohol intake Neuropsychopharmacology 2018 43 9 1840 1850 10.1038/s41386-018-0055-3 29748627
158 Chevaleyre V Takahashi KA Castillo PE Endocannabinoid-mediated synaptic plasticity in the CNS Annu Rev Neurosci 2006 29 37 76 10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.112834 16776579
159 Silberman Y Shi L Brunso-Bechtold JK Weiner JL Distinct mechanisms of ethanol potentiation of local and paracapsular GABAergic synapses in the rat basolateral amygdala J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008 324 1 251 260 10.1124/jpet.107.128728 17921186
160 McCool BA Frye GD Pulido MD Botting SK Effects of chronic ethanol consumption on rat GABAA and strychnine-sensitive glycine receptors expressed by lateral/basolateral amygdala neurons Brain Res 2003 963 1–2 165 177 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03966-5 12560122
161 Diaz MR Christian DT Anderson NJ McCool BA Chronic ethanol and withdrawal differentially modulate lateral/basolateral amygdala paracapsular and local GABAergic synapses J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2011 337 1 162 170 10.1124/jpet.110.177121 21209156
162 Hill MN Patel S Campolongo P Tasker JG Wotjak CT Bains JS Functional interactions between stress and the endocannabinoid system: From synaptic signaling to behavioral output J Neurosci 2010 30 45 14980 14986 10.1523/jneurosci.4283-10.2010 21068301
163 Tan H Ahmad T Loureiro M Zunder J Laviolette SR The role of cannabinoid transmission in emotional memory formation: Implications for addiction and schizophrenia Front Psychiatry 2014 5 73 10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00073 25071606
164 Robinson SL Alexander NJ Bluett RJ Patel S McCool BA Acute and chronic ethanol exposure differentially regulate CB1 receptor function at glutamatergic synapses in the rat basolateral amygdala Neuropharmacology 2016 108 474 484 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.12.005 26707595
165 Harlan BA Becker HC Woodward JJ Riegel AC Opposing actions of CRF-R1 and CB1 receptors on VTA-GABAergic plasticity following chronic exposure to ethanol Neuropsychopharmacology 2018 43 10 2064 2074 10.1038/s41386-018-0106-9 29946104
166 Vinod KY Kassir SA Hungund BL Cooper TB Mann JJ Arango V Selective alterations of the CB1 receptors and the fatty acid amide hydrolase in the ventral striatum of alcoholics and suicides J Psychiatr Res 2010 44 9 591 597 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.11.013 20015515
167 DePoy L Daut R Brigman JL Chronic alcohol produces neuroadaptations to prime dorsal striatal learning Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 110 36 14783 14788 10.1073/pnas.1308198110 23959891
168 Basavarajappa BS Saito M Cooper TB Hungund BL Stimulation of cannabinoid receptor agonist 2-arachidonylglycerol by chronic ethanol and its modulation by specific neuromodulators in cerebellar granule neurons Biochim Biophys Acta 2000 1535 1 78 86 10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00085-5 11113634
169 Basavarajappa BS Cooper TB Hungund BL Chronic ethanol administration down-regulates cannabinoid receptors in mouse brain synaptic plasma membrane Brain Res 1998 793 1–2 212 218 10.1016/s0006-8993(98)00175-9 9630633
170 Basavarajappa BS Hungund BL Down-regulation of cannabinoid receptor agonist-stimulated [35S]GTP gamma S binding in synaptic plasma membrane from chronic ethanol exposed mouse Brain Res 1999 815 1 89 97 10.1016/s0006-8993(98)01072-5 9974126
171 Basavarajappa BS Saito M Cooper TB Hungund BL Chronic ethanol inhibits the anandamide transport and increases extracellular anandamide levels in cerebellar granule neurons Eur J Pharmacol 2003 466 1–2 73 83 10.1016/s0014-2999(03)01557-7 12679143
172 Karoly HC Mueller RL Andrade CC Hutchison KE THC and CBD effects on alcohol use among alcohol and cannabis co-users Psychol Addict Behav 2021 10.1037/adb0000706
173 Gunn R Jackson K Borsari B Metrik J A longitudinal examination of daily patterns of cannabis and alcohol co-use among medicinal and recreational veteran cannabis users Drug Alcohol Depend 2019 205 107661 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2019.107661 31715437
174 Stopponi S Fotio Y Domi A Inhibition of fatty acid amide hydrolase in the central amygdala alleviates co-morbid expression of innate anxiety and excessive alcohol intake Addict Biol 2018 23 6 1223 1232 10.1111/adb.12573 29071769
175 Cippitelli A Cannella N Braconi S Increase of brain endocannabinoid anandamide levels by FAAH inhibition and alcohol abuse behaviours in the rat Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2008 198 4 449 460 10.1007/s00213-008-1104-0 18446329
176 Holleran KM Wilson HH Fetterly TL Ketamine and MAG lipase inhibitor-dependent reversal of evolving depressive-like behavior during forced abstinence from alcohol drinking Neuropsychopharmacology 2016 41 8 2062 2071 10.1038/npp.2016.3 26751284
177 Fucich EA Mayeux JP McGinn MA Gilpin NW Edwards S Molina PE A novel role for the endocannabinoid system in ameliorating motivation for alcohol drinking and negative behavioral affect after traumatic brain injury in rats J Neurotrauma 2019 36 11 1847 1855 10.1089/neu.2018.5854 30638118

